In the few sketches, in two ways, brain's parts have been are shown. Any thumb can
be taken; for example, on left thumb, frontal, parietal, temporal and occipital
correspondences have been shown. By applying star magnet, cluster magnet, general
treatment can be given. They can be used for specific treatment of special function of
every lobe. An example is given to illustrate this :

Case History :

A therapist wife became suddenly unconscious, the body slumped and vision of
one eye reduced. As the therapist fully knew the treatment, he pressed on the ten eye
orbit points & ear's ten points, his wife regained consciousness but eyes' vision did not
improve and her recognition sense reduced, memory also reduced. After a few days'
treatment, when her condition improved, she was brought to the Sansthan. Only one
ailment had remained - vision of one eye. Since eye's vision centres are in brain's
occipital region and according to the sketches above, occipital lobes are in small fingers’
all the three phalanges. By pressing by probe and at the nodes, magnets were applied.
After two days, the patient herself came to the Sansthan and informed that eyes' vision
has fully been restored and on other symptoms also substantial improvement had taken
place.

Similarly, by using the knowledge of Human Physiology and Anatomy, serious
diseases can be easily treated. It is for this reason, physiology based knowledge has
been specifically included in this book so that Acupressure's ordinary and special
knowledgeable therapists can use according to their needs.

For each part related lobe's specific treatment can be done applying byol magnets
on the concemed ten points specific finger's three joints. Several types of disease
examples have been given which also include brain related disorders.

Example of paralysis of an old person is being given here which is very important
for its simplicity in use.

Case History :

A75 year old patient was brought to the Sansthan by 4-5 persons in their lap. He
had suffered paralysis a few days back. His voice, right hand & right leg were completely
affected. His voice has very feeble and unclear; the arm could not be lifted; the leg too
was unable to be moved and walking was of course, impossible.

Charak -3 Ayurvedic Acupressure 190

