One of the important function of cerebellum is to ensure coordination and
control between different organs of the body. It establishes posture and
balance between different type of voluntary muscles. Due to cerebellum's
control, a person's activity is continuous & stable, otherwise the movement
may appear that of an alcoholic gait. All in all the above establishes
coordination and control which is like the Direction (fa) element.

The main part of the brain i.e. the spinal cord and the network of spinal nerves
that come out of the spinal cord are spread over the entire body. And because
of it, all small & big organs of the body are active. As we know the main
function of the spinal nerves is to obtain knowledge of impulses of all changes
in the cosmos of all pains, temperature & touch. All changes in the cosmos
like heat, cold & humidity are known because of the network of spinal nerves
and the spinal cord. In the absence of this system, it will be impossible for
the body to know such changes taking place in the cosmos. Weather and
seasons are components of Kaal and this very Kaal corresponds to the spinal
cord and the spinal nerves. Thus the body receives knowledge of temperature
changes & all impulses only through this system. The importance of peripheral
nervous system in the body is well known and this system is at par with Kaal
from Ayurveda's point of view. The importance of Kaal described in scriptures
is correct & not exaggerated & is in accordance with its quantity and quality.
By Ayurvedic Acupressure treatment of every part & sub-part of the nervous
system can thus easily be done. This is becoming a milestone in medical
fraternity. It is also worth mentioning that Ayurveda's main principle (421
sae am five) isa replica of every emotion of cosmos as present in the
body. Under this dictum treatment of all ordinary & serious diseases as known
through physiology & anatomy is being done through Ayurvedic Acupressure.
Described in Ayurveda the form of Kaal corresponds to physiology's spinal
cord & spinal nerves & accordingly for treatment purposes for each ners

