invalid child is born, or if due to an accident a member is killed, then the whole family
is drowned in sadness. The reason of every ailment or sad incident in current life is
some present or of past life's deeds (misdeeds). Such conditions, may not repeat
generation after generation, and even in the current life; this is, feasible by following
directions of principles of Ayurveda. The quality of life and the energy system (311)
bestowed on a person in the current life is due to the combination of karmas of his
previous births and the deeds of his/her parents. It has already been stated earlier that a
person's current body form and structure is governed by his/her karmas in previous
lives. And in the current life, due to Kaal's seasonal changes, weak, medium and excellent,
three types of life happen. The Kaal's related results are cured either on their own or by
treating on Kaal's acu-meridian. But to be free from problems due to previous birth's
causes, the methods indicated in Ayurveda may be difficult to follow in practice but
are not impossible. Divine treatment through Ayurvedic Acupressure is possible. To
be freed from the misdeeds of previous births, the first & the simplest method is that
from today itself we give up those activities which adversely affect our life & body and
which ensure our next birth to be in a purer form or be completely freed from rebirth,
called moksha. The guide for good and bad karma is Mann (Mind) according to Ayurveda
and Soul (Atma) is the supervisor of all karmas.
Yam (a) and Niyam (fra):
In Ayurvedic Acupressure by following Yam & Niyam as laid down in scriptures
or by treating on the related meridians, divine treatment can be done.
There are ten each of Yam & Niyam :
a) Yam: (i) Aanrshansya (31g) (ii) Pardon (81) (iii) Truth (art)
(iv) Non-violence (3f€a1) (v) Charity (@™) (vi) Purity (31sf@)
(vii) Affection (tft) (viii) Happiness (781A) (ix) Instealthiness
(ata) (x) Tenderness (aTéa)
b) Niyam: (i) Cleanliness (8it4) (ii) Simplicity (Weta) (iii) Prayers (74)
(iv) Meditation (417) (v) Self- study (TET) (vi) Self-control
(sfxafae) (vii) Firm determination (311) (viii) Observing silence
(at) (ix) Fasting (3747) (x) Bathing (=F)

Charak-3 Ayurvedic Acupressure 28

