In the shloka the integration of body, sense organs, mann and atma has been called
Ayu (3179) /life. Synonyms of Ayu are Dhari (&f) (which holds), Jeevit (#ifért) (Living),
Nityag (fr) eternal/active/mobile and Anubandh (31444) (continuity). As long as
the body has the Sanyog (4471) (combination) of sense and action organs, Mann and
Atma, that person is called Ayushman (314414) (living) and when the Sanyog breaks,
the person is called non-living or dead. Hence among the synonyms of Ayu, the first
one is called Dhari - that is holding Prana (31). When the energy system separates
from the body, the person is called dead. Similarly, the word Jeevan (Jeevit) also denotes
the same things. Nityag the mobility in a person “faa 7reafa sft Firrt:” is only due
to'Ayu’. Stqarq—aqaente weaeTaer sfc — this means that the Atma has relation with
one body and then one body after another, so it is also called a continuity. Similarly,
due to life being present in the body, it is called Jiva (sta) and definition of life has
been given accordingly. Due to ‘life’, the jiva is called "Chetan"-(alive) and in its absence
it is "Achetan" (3FaA) and Jarh (8) dead substance.

Acupressure is a combination of two words Acu + Pressure. Acu means - needle
and Pressure means - to press. So giving pressure on a place equal to needle-like
point, changes are brought about. From scientific point of view, the above definition of
life, has been considered equivalent to energy system. This is established along with
life and when this system becomes weak, a disease is born and when it finishes, there is
death. According to scriptures, this energy system is the basis of all conscience. This
has been defined also with words as Prana, Aayush, Chetna etc. In Ayurveda, it is called
Atma. In China, and other eastern countries Japan, Korea, this Chetan (Prana) is called
‘Chi’, 'Qi’, 'Ki' - All words are equivalent to the energy system. All these can be synonyms
but can't be considered separate from it. According to Ayurveda, at a macro level, the
constitution of Jiva (14) is formed of two elements - Body and Atma. Atma, being
infinite, invisible and of the most micro in size, it is called shapeless and resides in the
body. In the body, due to advent of diseases, the energy system gets affected that causes
imbalance. This imbalance gradually increases which increases the extent and period
of disease. And finally it takes the form ofa serious disease. To achieve balance in the
energy system is the objective of Acupressure. Acupressure has several forms and
names and the nomenclature is based on the medium/object.

Charak-3 Ayurvedic Acupressure 2

