Mentioned above, briefly, are all various branches of Acupressure / Acupuncture,
in which there is difference in concepts and thoughts but the basis, principles and laws
are almost common.

Ayurvedic Acupressure is based on Scriptural Ayurvedic vision. Scriptures are
not bonded to any country, people, time or Sanskriti but the scripture is universal, for
all time and all thought processes are incorporated in it. In another words, it may be
said that these are the fountains and fathers of all thoughts. What is necessary is the
vision and direction which evolved Ayurvedic Acupressure. All thought processes of
Chinese Acupuncture, Allopathic Physiology and Anatomy, Sujok's Byol Magnet,
Correspondence etc., Homeopathy’s Tridosh etc. have been given the fullest respect
and they are there in background in Ayurvedic Acupressure.

Fundamentally Ayurveda is based on infinity, ten prana respectacles (@&I 3° Sit),
on trinity and on triorigin principle. Hence, through it, the infinite form in cosmos and
body's comparison can be made on 3-3, 10-10 basis. Hencz, the body of infinite cells,
having infinite diseases can be studied in infinite ways and on that basis, can be treated.
The infinite's diagnosis and treatment can be done in the 10 or fundamentally in the
form of 3. In the Sansthan's book "Charak Ayurvedic Acupressure", the 10-origin
principles have been enunciated with reference to Ayurveda. And in this book, Ayurveda's
tri origin form has been explained and made the basis for diagnosis and treatment.

Keeping this tri-origin principle in mind,energy system's three important factors,
out of various systems the digestive/production system, the blood circulatory system
and nervous system will form the basis for three ways for diagnosis and treatment on
the 10-origin principles and the treatment based on nervous system will be presented
in this book.

With the 10-origin principle by diving human body's ten parts, then each part's ten
sub-parts, and again each one's ten parts, efforts have been made to treat the exact and
precise root location of the ailment. For example for treatment of right hand's palm's
eczema, applying points for the whole body or even the whole hand would be an
unnecessary waste of energy; so treatment on the palm's meridian and its precise points
have proved to be very effctive and successful.

Charak-3 Ayurvedic Acupressure 4

