One should have balanced sleep. Untimely and sleeping at wrong time (fYS1 I
frat ain), excessive sleep at improper time (FIT =I afta) and not sleeping either
during day or during night (Fist a var a gai) is harmful. Thus these sleeps are
like Kaal ratris (#1e Wf), So for these who want a happy life and long age should leave
these prohibitive sleep (@, 31fa, feat) and should pursue a balanced sleep (W1 FART
Ga). This is a fundamental principle to remain healthy. Day time sleeping has been
specified only during summers because during the period of low nutrition people with
weak and rough constitution have increased wind and due to nights having shorter
duration, it is better for day time sleeping. Sleeping during day time, Kapha increases
and so increase of Kapha in period of low nutrition becomes necessary for improved
health. In seasons other than summers, day time sleeping results in Kapha increase and
attack of Pitta. Hence,one should not sleep during day time in other seasons. Day time
sleeping also causes headache, heaviness in body, poor digestion, reduced Agni, edema,
nausea, clod and cough, pain in half the body, urticaria, boils, itching, dizziness, poor
memory, fever, inability of organ functioning, throat ailments, increase of toxin
movements - are all the problems that happen with day time sleeping.

CG Sleep - importance in Life :
Qageh VesseEtM TAT: YSr Aa: |
weacrenagea uw wilerared fegted: 1
Charak Sanhita; Sutra Sthan 21/51
The way taking properly prepared food is essential for body's safety, in the same
way, proper planned sleep provides happiness. Both obesity and weak body are caused
one to sleep and food.
3) Brahmacharya (Celibecy) :

This is importance in life's first ashram (31974) in scriptures. During this period,
several rules and regulations are specified in which the seventh tissue (saving semen)
is the most important. During co-habitation (sexual act with wife) the discharge of
semen that takes place for the creation of a child, is the proper utilisation of semen. It
has generally been seen that in bad company, young boys and girls damage their
brahmacharya (celibecy) resulting in the semen vessels becoming weak. During night-

33 Charak-3 Ayurvedic Acupressure

