(a)

Here, there is a emphasis on Kaal-Parinam (are a1 oft) & deeds (#4) which
determine the soul encased in physical body. When time is not treated well
or respected or misused or not properly identified - result is misery (#8 7)
& it may vary from acute (#7) to chronic (3:@).

When our deeds are not in tune with as ordained in scriptures, we succumb to
illness from one generation to another. It is known as "Pragya Aparadh".

The above describes bad effects of Kaal and doing deeds not according to
scriptures, resulting in misery from one generation to another (called Pragya
Apradh). Treatment of miseries from both the above causes (Time, Pragya
Apradh) is feasible by Ayruvedic Acupressure. In Ayurveda, treatment & cure
of such diseases has been termed as God dependant (¢a=74974). Such cure is,
no doubt, possible through vedic mantras following satvic life; but in
Ayurvedic Acupressure, meridians have been identified for curing miseries
due to planetary effect on chakras, yam, niyam etc. By treating at acupoints
on these meridians, such diseases have been pacified, as expected. As far as
the time meridian is concerned, based on the 10-origin principle, each finger
& toe have been provided with three types of meridians. Here, it may be
worth mentioning that in Ayurvedic Acupressure, metaphysical cure through
physical meridians, is possible. The salient feature of Ayurveda is inseparable
nature of physical & metaphysical. In the left hand's ring finger (Lt RF), Time's
50 meridians on 3 joints & one on nail chakra, have been identified.

There is a long list of diseases which occur due to Kaal like diseases occuring
due to weather, season & climate and in women diseases connected with
period disorders; cold/cough due to extreme weather, sinus, arthritis,
sunstroke, dizziness, vertigo, blockage in blood vessels or high blood pressure,
paralysis, nose bleeding, haemorrhages, gastric, bile attack, insomnia, untimely
sleeping etc.

Result of Kaal :

The most important element of Hetu Sutra is the result of time. Childhood,
youth & old age are all result of Kaal. From an infant to an adolescent & in

the form of male/female youth, beard, moustache & menstrual flow are
respectively the result of Kaal. In a young girl from twelve to fifteen years of

13 Charak-3 Ayurvedic Acupressure

