Adetailed analysis of this subject has been provided in Charak Sanhita's Sharir
sthan. This will be presented also in the next book in the series of Ayurvedic
Acupressure. In medical sience, for patient's treatment proper assessment is
very well known. Yellowness in a patient's eyes, yellowish nails, yellowness
of urine and by seing of yellowness of under garments, assessment of jaundice
is well known. Old people's night urination habit is indicative of enlargement
of prostrate, this is easily assessed. Due to the eating of fatty and oily foods,
ailments of liver/gall bladder can easily be assessed.A habit of melancholiness
and habit of crying at small little events,the ailments of circulatory system
can easily be assessed.
Similarly visible is an important method for treatment of ailments. A patient's
obesity, heaviness, thinness, his behaviour, changes in skin colour or just by
touching, an expert therapist can literally see several ailments of a patient.
The aforesaid three methods of understanding ailment(s) first of all the
therapist examines and the decision that is taken is faultless and firm in the
future; but only partial/little knowledge does not give proper symptomic
diagnosis. Hence keeping in view the importance of three methods for a
wisetherapist each of the three methods are explained hereunder.
Examination of Physical(Visible) Parts of Body :

A therapist willing to know the real reason of ailment of a patient, he should
examine the efficiency of each organ related to the patient's body. The smell of the
body, even though it being a subject of the nose, yet its examination can be done by
guessing. For example if there are several persons sitting in room but only one person
is attracted by flies and mosquites, it is indicative that juices secreted only from his
body are sweet. If lice (3) runs away on their own from a person's body, then it is
indicative of tastelessness of tissues of that person's body.

When there is a doubt if the blood is infected with 'blood pitta’ or it is pure, for
this that blood is given to a crow ora dog and if they eat it, it is pure but if they smell it
and leave it. Then it is implied that the blood was impure and infected with blood pitta
disease. Similarly expert therapists, with their divine power, easily judge the serious
physical/mental ailments of a pure, sattvic person by entering his mental faculties.

Charak-3 Ayurvedic Acupressure 36

