harmful for body tissues like plasma, blood, skin, flesh, bones, bone marrow,
semen, ova and glow. And by the time a person learns of this slow poison, his
body is drowned in a permanent damage. Today diseases have superceeded
the human beings. Life style of some people, routine and an attack of machine
yug is responsible for this. In this machine age, a human being has started
behaving like a machine that has resulted in every person whether for developed
nation or a developing nation or an underdeveloped nation, or people from
cultured society. Every one is suffering from some disease or the other. This
truth has been analysed by the learned famous poet Goswami Tulsidas in his
Ramcharitmanas as the effect of Kaliyug as below:

at tifgea thr a attr wel, ates ferter start &

This line has become a reality in today’s life. This line makes it clear, how an
ailment takes place. Ego and pride, without any cause, would cause serious
ailments whose treatment will not be feasible by any physical medicine. This
is apart of Pragya Apradh (331 S10tTe) (mental abberation), described earlier,
and this disease today affects the mind and gives rise to mental disease. Mental
diseases generally occur due to ego, false pride, show man ship etc and which
in tum gives rise to depression. This disease is a creation of today's life style
and living.

(iii) Health giving substances : By taking these substances, strength giving
vata, pitta, kapha are produced and they save plasma, blood and other tissues
from pollution. For example, cow's milk, specified chemical products and
sex stimulants. Chemically stimulants and sex stimulants both these words
have an important place in Ayurveda but we shall present a detailed discussion
later on.

Here, it is clear that these Vata, Pitta and Kapha, if toxinated create problems
for the body and are then called Dosh (23) but when they help and provide
strength in holding the body (47), then these are called (*q)/tissues.

“grigaong cer: aca te—emone—-afreftercona vet:

39 Charak -3 Ayurvedic Acupressure

