stool have scientific analysis, on the other hand as described in Ayurveda diagnosis and
treatment principles have been stated by seeing , by touching and assessing and reaching
the root cause of disease, treatment is desirable. At the same time, based on common
and specific attributes of Akash, Prithvi etc. Panchmahabhoots an analysis can be made
of every factor of body, and as such proper treatment is effective - this no doubt needs
experience and sensitivity but in all this, investment of a lot of money is not necessary.
From Ayurvedic point of view, treatment has conventionally being done in food habits,
herbal medicines and Panch Karma (4 #4) but in modern times absence of pure herbs
and experts of Ayurvedic knowledge has resulted not only in non-propogation of
Ayurvedic knowledge, no youth gets interested in this therapy, no scientists of various
countries got attracted to this but Acupuncture's Chinese point of view and Ayurveda's
divine knowledge integration is similar to the life process's definition incorporating
five elements body and Atma's inegration. Ayurvedic Acupzessure / Acupuncture not
only includes both the Ayurveda's divine knowledge and chinese heavenly knowledge
but non-availability of Ayurveda's herbs and chinese acupuncture's needle piercing pain
is saved and avoided. In Ayurvedic Acupressure treatment tools/methods include colour
seeds, sujok needle, small/big byol magnets. By using them, Ayurvedic Acupressure
treatment has incorporated all the rules/principles of Ayurveda, allopathic physiology,
anatomy, Chinese Acupuncture, Korea's scientist and Philosopher Dr. Park Jae Woo's
byol magnet. And incorporating all the Ayurveda's view points and principles, the
developed Ayurvedic Acupressure is inspired by conceptsof the aforesaid treatment
therapies.

The chemical form of blood or all other tissues and stool tests and their
organization is based on PH. PH indicates which element is acid or base as predominant
in the chemistry of stool. The specific attribute of acid is hot and that of the base is
cold. This is also an intrinsic ingradient in the Chinese Acupuncture and in the Ayurvedic
concepts. In allopathic physiology, detailed analytical knowledge is implied in the
principles of their treatment therapies. As faras the principle of yin/yang is concerned,
every nerve of spinal cord's division as anterior or posterior, constriction or dilatation,
sympathetic or parasympathetic, efferent or afferent nerves, sympathetic and
parasympathetic nervous system, all these are clear examples of the yin-yang principle.
Thus, all treatment therapies, specially Chinese Acupuncture, Allopathy and Ayurvedic
view point have complete similarity and this is in accordance with Ayurvedic divine
principles, Tulyarthata.

Charak-3 Ayurvedic Acupressure 44

