Dravya (Element) Description

Material science is based on the integration of the common and specific attributes
and functions of the Panchmahabhoots - Akash, Vayu, Agni, Jal and Prithvi. All this is
being indicated hereunder in briefly. Detailed description of all this has already been
done earlier in Charak Ayurvedic Acupressure Part-I. Repetition, though briefly only
strengthens understanding and generates unifermity. On the other hand specific,
difference, commoness and opposites also provide information. For example, ina heap
of specific grain, if the same grain is added, then due to oneness, there is increase;
however, if pulse are added to other grain, the combination becomes of specific nature.
If wheat and pulse grains are mixed together, then the combination is not an increase of
wheat but it is something different and both the element's attributes and functions are
separate.

In Ayurveda an element (54) is viewed from two angles i.e. common (general
AMA) and specific (fats). For example in medical world we commonly use word
general physian or specialist of the specific brach. Similarly everywhere there is
manifestation of these too. As such it is also very important factor in Ayruvedic
Acupressure treatment. For example, common form of spondylitis or spondylitis on
account of same specific factor such as compression of some nerve or prolapse of
some vertebra or due to osteophyte formation etc.

These two are classified further on the basis of fundamental triad-function (4),
structure (5-4), properties (41). As such similar function (ATT aa), similar structure
(AMT =) and similar properties (AMT FW) and specific function (fase aH),
specific structure (fat #52) and specific property (fas 7).

Classification of General (avart a fess) :

1) Dravya (structure) similarity - by mixing similar grains, due to similarity

there is increase, it is an example of dravya similarity.

2) Function similarity - by considering the food and life style of elements
similar in functioning. For example, in take of all the food articles sweet in
nature is responsible for gaining weight. Therefore kaphaj dravya produces
kaph.

45 Charak -3 Ayurvedic Acupressure

