cucumber grows in summers; and even if it does not euro all heat producing ailments,
it at least reduces and provides some relief in those ailments. Hence, during summers,
cucumber is very effective and worth eating in ailments of summers. Taking food, in
conformity with the season and effect of kaal, not only keeps a control on ailments but
it can also result in reducing ailment. As we know, during winters, sweet taste is
prominent and tastes that control sweet taste are bitter, pungent and astringent, so by
eating these type of foods, winter affecting ailments can be controlled. As we know,
fried foods have prominence of pungent and bitter tastes; ginger has astringent properly.
Hence, fried foods and vata-producing foods like maize and millet (419) breads do no
harm, but eating them in some form of the other, help in body building and maintenance.
Similarly, by analysing each type of food, we can keep a balance of elements and ensure
ahealthy and strong body. During summers, Jal starts drying irrespective of whether it
is of cosmos, or of body. Hence, during summers dry and fried foods are painful for
the body whereas on the other hand taking sweak fruits and their juices, squashes etc. is
healthy to the body. This is the reason that during summers, Melons, Water Melons,
Mangoes, Lichi (i+), Phalse (#11) like juicy fruits are nature's gift and extremely
healthy. Eating them checks in the body. At the same time sweetened juice of raw Mango
Panna (41), squash, Jaljira (e1sfh) all these during summers provide satisfaction and
strength to the body. Hence, Kaal and result of Kall from the point of view of taste
science, is both direct and indirect.

© Functions, Attribute, Common, Specific Integration :

From the above methods, ailments of living beings, causes of diseases, desires,
body strength, functions, kaal etc. the tri-origin of all these from Ayurvedic point of
view can be diagnosed and the causes established. Then efforts for treatment need to
be used in direct and indirect, physical and metaphysical manner.

As stated earlier, the divine principle of Ayurveda is Tulyarthata (correspondence).
The main objective of this book is a new and recent effort to provide an integration
between the ancient and modem thoughts and using the Tulyarthata concepts to provide
a commonality between treatment by modern medicines based on principles of
physiology and anatomy and principles of Acupressure / Acupuncture based on
Ayurvedic point of view.

Charak-3 Ayurvedic Acupressure 50

