Chapter-2
Nervous System

Human beings have intellect. The abilities which classify them different from
other living beings is due to their high level of Nervous System, specially the brain. In
acomplicated mechanism of the body, for co-ordination between different systems of
the body, it has a special system called Nervous System. This is an important system of
the body because it co-ordinates with and controls all other systems. It co-ordinates
and rules over the entire body. In absence of its supervision, all body organs will function
unharmoniously. The Nervous System controls all voluntary and involuntary actions of
the body. After receiving all the impulses, it sends them to the brain. The nervous
system is not limited only to memory, knowledge & intellect but it is that director
which ensures speedy co-ordination among all various organs according to their intemal
and external environmental changes. A human being is conscious towards the effect of
external world; the physical & chemical changes occuring there in affect the human
body & there is always a little or more response to it. If a thorn pricks the sole of our
foot, or the foot touches ice or fire, it immediately draws back. This reaction is not
performed by cells of the foot only. As the thom pricks the sole, there is excitement in
the life fluid (#4 3-7) there & this information instantaneously reaches the brain through
special nerves. Getting this information, brain cells get correspondingly excited and
the resulting impulse immediately reaches muscles of the leg; there is some reaction
in the muscles and the leg immediately withdraws from that object. Thus, effect of
external environment or object is not limited only to the a“fected cell, but the body's
nervous system gets the impulse and becomes helpful in the reaction by the body.
Transmission of impulses is the only activity of the nervous system.

The human brain is the most complicated and advanced among all the living
beings. It is for this reason that a human being has the maximum intelligence. The
operation of the whole body is by the brain. It regulates and controls all the functions
of the body and activities of all organs. Information from any part of the body reaches
the brain very fast. First impulses reaches the body by nerves, then from brain the

Charak-3 Ayurvedic Acupressure 52

