excitement/ reaction reach the muscles & then all actions of the body take place. The
nervous system generates co-ordination & balance among the millions of cells in the
body so that the whole body may function as one unit.

All body systems are under the control of the nervous system. Without the

later’s permission/approval no part can perform properly. It also has control over the
internal organs like the digestive system & functions of the heart, lungs, kidneys etc.
also.

a

1)

2)

Nervous System Divisions :
Based on the function and attributes, the nervous system has two main divisions:
i) Voluntary Nervous System
ii) Involuntary Nervous System
Voluntary Nervous System — Central Nervous System :

All the nerve fibres of this system go to voluntary muscles. These fibres convey
several types of impulses to the brain. This part is composed of the brain,
Sushumna & several nerves coming out from there. This nervous system is
voluntary & functions under our wishes & is called ‘Central Nervous System’.
With the help of this system, we continuously receive different types of impulses
and prepare ourselves to function according to environment of the external world,
move our arms and legs & work after careful & thoughtful consideration.

Involuntary Nervous System — Autonomic Nervous System :

Nerve fibres of this system go to various autonomic muscles of lungs, bladder,
uterus, stomach, intestines & to various glands on whose speed we have no
control. Their nerves keep conveying impulses to the brain from various internal
organs & they function automatically. They do not depend on our wishes. These
nerves have such a large & spread out group that they have been classified as a
separate nervous system. Due to their automatic functioning, they are called
Autonomic Nervous System. The nerve fibres of this system do come out of
the Central Nervous System and yet they are independent. Based on their
attributes, this system has again been divided into two Nervous Systems :

53 Charak -3 Ayurvedic Acupressure

