a) Sympathetic Nervous System

b) Parasympathetic Nervous System

The functioning of these two are opposite to each other, Their centre is in brain's
Hypothalamus which controls the functioning of both the sympathetic &
parasympathetic nervous system.

O Affrent & Efferent Nerves :

Impulses from nerves of the nervous system reach the brain,
spinal cord & then from there to different parts of the body. To receive impulses and to
send them to different parts of the body is done by different nerval fibres. Impulses,
from excitements, are received from different parts of the body and carried to the
central nervous system and the nerves which do this are called 'Affrent Nerves' i.e.,
impulses carried to the Brain are by Afferent Nerves. Seing, Touch, Smell, Hearing are
the senses which are carried by Afferent Nerves to the Nervous System.

There are some nerves which send & distribute impulses from central nervous
system to the muscles, glands etc, Such nerves are called Efferent nerves. Some efferent
nerves are given specific names based on their function. Nerves which excite the muscles
resulting in their contraction are called motor nerves; similarly, nerves which make
secretion increase, are called secretory nerves and those nerves which increase or
decrease blood vessel's opening are called vasomotor nerves. Nerves which transmit
impulse, after receiving from one part of the body, to the central nervous system, are
called sensory nerves.

Both the Affrent & Efferent Nerves generally are together but sometimes they
are present separately.

GO Central Nervous System :

Brain : Brain is the main part of the Central Nervous System. It is the most
important organ of the body. Brain is the centre of intellect, desire, emotions and
impulses. Learning of any activity, understanding the same and the process of thinking
about the same, is the function of the brain. Operation of the live-machine, that is the
body, is by the brain only. It is, therefore, that nature has kept its location on the top and

Charak-3 Ayurvedic Acupressure 54

