it has been housed in a sturdy box, called skull so that it is safe and may
perform its function smoothly. Information from different parts of the body
continuously reaches the brain & it keeps giving instructions, as necessary, to respective
parts of the body. The brain is located in the skull cavity and is a continuum of the
spinal cord. It is big in size and its look is uneven. In spinal cord, grey matter is inside
& white matter is outside. Brain & spinal cord's grey matter is of nerve cells. White
matter is made of nerves which come out from cells. Brain & spinal cord both have
tissues («ftr) under the bones to ensure safety which have three layers of fibrous
nerves; these save the brain & spinal cord from shock. All the three layers are arranged
from outside to inside :

1) the upper most layer is just below the bones & is called Duramatter.

This is made of strong, thick and connective tissues. This matter is attached
to the internal surface of the skull. From the internal surface (atafts
et), some matter have projections inside & these keep various parts of
the brain together so that they are stable in their places;

2) just below the duramatter, there is another layer which is called Arachnoid

matter. This is softer and thinner than Duramatter. This is made of fibres
(at) and flexible tissues. Between the duramatter and the archnoid
matter, there is a small quantity of serous fluid which keeps the internal
surfaces of the duramatter & the archnoid matter always damp and
lubricated;

3) the layer below the arachnoid mater is the Piamatter. This is stuck with

the brain and at some places they also go inside the brain nerves/fibres.
In this cover/membrane there is a network of cells which supply nutrients
and oxygen to the brain cells. The cells of Piamatter remain in the brain
furrows.

All the three layers are not absolutely separated with each other but at places
there is some empty space between them. The empty space between duramatter &
arachnoid matter is called sub-duramatter space. Space between arachnoid & piamatter
is called sub-arachnoid space. In these empty spaces, there is a fluid called cerebro-
spinal-fluid. In this fluid, there are minerals, water, salts, proteins, glucose & lymphatic

55 Charak -3 Ayurvedic Acupressure

