foramen & the sacral foramen. Like the brain, the spinal cord is also made of gray &
white matter but in the spinal cord the white matter is outside & the grey matter is
inside. The grey content is organised in the shape of 'H' and in its centre, there is a
through opening from top to bottom - called central canal. This canal is connected to
brain's fourth ventricle and is filled with cerebro-spinal fluid. If it is dissected spirally,
then only grey matter is visible. This grey matter has four arms-two infront & two in
the rear. The front ones-left & right are called anterior horns and the rear ones left &
right are called posterior horns. Like the cerebral cortex, spinal cord's grey matter
also contains only nerve cells. In the grey matter of chest region, in addition to the
anterior & posterior horns, in between small horns also exist.

All the nerves that emanate from the anterior horn go to the muscles of trunk
(4S), legs and arms, and so are motor (3X8) nerves. All the fibres from the posterior
hom go to the skin of different parts of the body. From the different parts of the body
skin, various impulses go to the posterior horn and are called sensory nerves (Wad).

White matter is made of fibres that come out of the cells. Through these fibres,
impulses and reactions reach different parts of the body. So these are motor nerves.
These fibres come from the brain to different parts of the body and from the body, they
go to different parts of the brain. Through these, brain receives impulses from different
organs of the body and from brain the reactions reach the muscles.

The spinal cord has an incomplete Khatika (%@ff#1), both at posterior and anterior,
which go from top to bottom. The one towards the back is thinner than the one towards
the chest. In the middle is the central tube filled with cerebro-spinal-fluid.

© Autonomic Nervous System :

There are some nerves in the body whose action is not connected to the brain but
these nerves originate from the central nervous system only. They forma separate part
as their actions are different. Nerves of this part neither convey any messages to the
brain not transmit any messages from the brain. Their action is automatic. Lungs, heart
beat, stomach's muscles' contraction & expansion, kidneys, urinary bladder, uterus etc's
working do not take place due to our wish. Nerves to control their activities have no
connection with brain centres. Nerves that control internal organs have free cell
ganglions & bacteria (3i-q). This system is related to the central nervous system's nerve
cells.

Charak- 3 Ayurvedic Acupressure 66

