This system can be classified into two branches based on function & structure :

1) Sympathetic

2) Parasympathetic

The sympathetic system is also called thoracic lumbar department (aa-afe faxrt)
because its plexuses (fest) come out from grey mater of spinal cord of lumbar
thoracic region. If the abdomen and chest areas are opened, it would be seen that on
both sides of which (JS4x1), a long chain of white coloured ganglions start from the
base of the skull and go upto the end of the coccyx (3T4/4Hf€a). These ganglions hang
like a necklace of beads. On both sides of the spinal cord, these chains of plexuses are
called sympathetic chains. Ganglions are connected intimately to the central nervous
system by means of communicating branches. From each ganglion, fibres come out &
meet the spinal cord. These fibres are called antireor ganglion fibres (“fear Y4 7).
So at the posterior of vertebrae, there is a chain of 22 ganglions placed on either side
of the vertebrae. These are called lateral vertebral ganglions. From these ganglions,
hind fibres come out, which combining with blood vessels, spread out in various organs
of the body. These ganglions and their fibres are called sympathetic nerves.

Fibres that come out of the spinal cord, from grey matter's lateral hom's cells in
the form of 38 fibres & come out with Ser. Then, they separate out from the original
fibres and enter the lateral ganglia; they are shining & white in colour. They are called
white rami communicates. Some fibres, come out of the ganglion & enter the spinal
nerves. These are dirty grey in colour & are called grey-rami communicates.
Actually in the sympathetic system, there is a double chain of ganglionated cords
extending from the base of the skull, lying in front of the vertebral column, to end in
the pelvis opposite the coccyx as the ganglion impar. These ganglions are arranged in
pairs and may be described as follows :

in the neck three pairs of cervical ganglia;
in the chest eleven pairs of thoracic ganglia;
in the loins four pairs of lumbar ganglia;

in the pelvis four pairs of sacral ganglia;

in the front of coccyx : the ganglion impar;

67 Charak -3 Ayurvedic Acupressure

