© Hetu Sutra (Cause Principle) :
1) Time (art):

11

Time is the first and the most important factor of Hetu Sutra. On account of
its importance, time has been presented in different ways. In Ayurveda, in the
birth and development of a human being, causes which help, have been
described in the Hetu Sutra. In the creation & development of a human body,
three factors viz., the result of time factor, imbalance in organs and action
are important. These very three factors are responsible in acute/chronic
diseases of human body. An analysis of these three factors is important and
is different from all other therapies. How does the time factor affect our
life? How much important it is? And how is it present in our body as a
component factor? An analysis of time factors, will indicate clearly the origin
of diseases in the body. Briefly it can be said that time is not only confined
to the clock, but is an integral part of the body and keeps a minute to minute
account from birth to death of our body. Therefore time is said to be more
powerful than the human being in Indian scriptures.
Time —a potent factor of human life

Time is one of the constituents of human body and is a vital element which
affects it from birth till death. It is not only confined to clock, it is integral
part of human body in the form of biological clock governed by planetary
movement in cosmos. That is why it has been described as a potent factor.
Due to impact of time, causes that affect human body in several ways are the
result of time (#1). Time can be described in many forms. Diseases that are
found as a result of Time are called Time-diseases (#1em 7). Their treatment
is an important subject of Ayurvedic Acupressure.
Stages of life a manifestation of time

Various stages of human life, like childhood, adolescence, youth, old age are
the result of time. Changes from child to adolescent like growth of hair/
moustaches, pubic hair, arm pit hair and maturity of semen are symbols of
adulthood. Without manifestation of these signs, a person may have physical
development but the males will lack reproductive power. Hence a male is
unable to become a father. This is not only a physical disease, but a social

Charak -3 Ayurvedic Acupressure

