@)

4PM. to 8 PM. is evening time & 8 PM. to midnight is the night time. From
midnight to 4 AM. & from 8 AM. to 12 noon are both coldest Prahar (et),
and from 8 AM. to 12 noon & 12 noon to 4 PM. are warmest; periods from
4 AM. to 8 AM. & 4 PM. to 8 PM. are neither very warm nor very cold. Ata
macro level the day has basically two parts cold & warm. Due to this change
air pressure's changes & due to the two humidity & then due to humidity a
day's state of Temperature, Air pressure & Humidity can be termed as weather.
In fact as described in the Vedas the three important elements, viz., Fire (317),
Wind (414) and Water (Set) are respectively forms of Temperature, Air
pressure and Humidity. In the creation of cosmos and a human being these
three elements, Space (31T1€1) & Earth (J) are no less important than the
previously named three but all the types of changes taking place in cosmos
and human beings are due to wind, fire & water. In cosmos the weather is
dependant on the three state of these elements in a day and on the basis of the
weather of two months, average temperature and humidity determines the
season.

The Origin of Time :

According to Ayurveda cosmos includes the Planets, Satelites, Stars etc.
Without describing all this in detail, only an indication is enough to state the
correspondence between cosmos (STéI™S) and the human being (fv), We
all know the Shastriy truth 4am seme met fowe- (as is cosmos so is the
human being). All planets in the solar system travel around it. Planets moving
in front of the sun not only shine but receiving sun's heat become hot but
when it is on the opposite side in the orbit, it is farther from the sun & become
cold. Similarly parts of the planet which face the sun, shine & so celebrate
the day, whereas parts on the opposite side are dark & have the night. So the
24 hours together of the day & night are termed one day. Actually a day's two
parts are in the form of day & night and in the 24 hours the day's & night's
hours increase/decrease based on the planet's position vis-a-vis the sun. So
even a day from normal warm & cold basis can be divided into two parts and
even the day itself some hours are warmer & some hours cooller than the

Charak-3 Ayurvedic Acupressure 18
