Blood
Pressure

ii) Secondary HBP :
In 5% cases H. B. P. is caused by some disease such as :

1)

2)

3)

Kidney disease - diabetes, nephritis, narrowing of arteries of Kidneys may
cause H. B. P.

Drugs - birth control pills, oestrogen, thyroid hormone pills, steroids, nasal
drops, sprays, alcohol causes H. B. P.

Phaeochromocytoma - A tumor of adrenal gland which increases its secretion
and thus the blood pressure.

Cushings Syndrome - Steroid's secretion increases by the adrenals so does
the blood pressure.

Contraction of Aorta - Walls of aorta thickens causing pressure on blood

flow.
Qo00

Questions to Discuss with Your Doctor :

© Are you tired ? Do you become short of breath with exertion or when you lie down ?

Do you get chest pain or pressure with exertion or at rest? Is there a change in your usual pattern ?

Do you ever feel like you are going to faint ? Have you fainted 7

© Do you sudden brief episodes of weakness in an arm or leg, loss of vision (like a blind being pulled over your
eyes), or difficulty speaking ? These could be waming symptoms of stroke (see p.342). People with atrial
fibrillation are at increased risk of stroke.

‘© Do you dring alcohol or caffeine-containing beverages ? These can cause atrial fibrillation.

© Is there a chance that cardioversion (shocking the heart to put it back into its normal rhythm) would be helpful
{if you have had atrial fibrillation for less than a year)?

‘© Do you need to take blood-thinning medication (such as warfarin or aspirin) if you are not already taking it?

your doctor might examine the following body structure or functions :

Heart rate, blood pressure, and weight
Heart and lungs

Veins in the neck
Ankles and legs (for sweling)

your doctor might order the following tests or studies :

Thyroid function tests (blood tests) at least once because thyroid abnormalities can cause atrial fibrillation.

Blood levels of digoxin

Blood levels of minerals (such as potassium and magnesium) regularly

Prothrombin time (time it takes blood to clot) if you are taking warfarin to thin blood

Electrocardiogram
24-hour monitor or event monitor if you may be going in and out of atrial fibrillation.

.
.
e Pulse
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.

Atrial Fibrillation : When You Visit Your Doctor

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 11 - English

