Chapter

(6)

Treatment of Heart Disease by Diet Control

The right kind of food provide the body with the nutrients it needs to heal itself. Proper

diet habits mav reverse heart disease.

1)

2)

Blood pressure normalises when one eats more potassium rich fruits and vegetables
and less sodium. Having low sodium salt or rock salt is always better. 5 gms of salt is
just enough. Salt intake in higher quantity escalates hypertension which may cause
heart disease, heart stroke or memory loss.

Extra weight is reduced when one reduces consumption of high-caloric junk food,
saturated fat and excess sugar.

Insulin resistance and diabetes reduces when proper types of carbohydrates are taken
and foods that enhances blood sugar are averted.

Free radical damage to the arteries and LDL cholestrol is inhibited by antioxidants in
fruits and vegetables.

Homocysteine levels are kept in check by the B complex vitamins in grains and lean
animal protein.

Elevated homocysteine damages arteries and also harms brain and weakens the
bones.

Inflammatory compounds decrease and the blood flow also increases, when one eats
the helathful fats in fish and flax seed (linseed).

Cholestrol and triglyceride levels are lowered by eating adequate fibre and cutting
back on fat and very starchy carbohydrates.

The The diet reverses the heart disease :

Oxygenis transported through the blood stream by the hemoglobin. Hemoglobin makes

up the bulk of our red blood cells (erythrocytes). The capillaries are smallest blood vessels
in the body. The capillaires are as small as a mere five microns in diameter (a micron is one
ten thousand of a centimeter) Red blood cells are about seven microns across. The red
blood cells move one after the other through the small capillaries. They are very flexible
hence they can reach upto the smallest cell of the body providing them with O, and taking
back Co, in return. This way Hb nourishes the body.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 11 - English

