Hence Patients of diabetes and hypertension should take low protein diet to
avoid stress on Kidneys :

Excess protein intake also creates an acidic condition in the blood.

In order to neutralise this acid, bicarbonate and calcium is mobilised from the bones.
When the pH of the blood is normalised, the calcium is not returned to the bone but
eliminated in the urine.

In the long run, high protein diet causes a serious calcium deficiency weakening the
bones. it causes osteoporasis.

Persons with low protein diet have positive calcium balance.

Person with high protein diete have a serious calcium imbalance.

Milk is imperfect food :

Whole milk, butter and chesse are significant sources of saturated fat. It raises cholestrol
level and the risk of heart diseases.

Non fat milk is also a major player in bringing on heart disease. Non fat milk contains
substantial amount of protein. it is low in vitamin B-complex. The metabolism of the
protein in the absence of vitamin B complex contributes to the building up of
homocysteine. it causes heart disease.

To increase milk output the animals are being injected with steroid hormones. It may
be a factor causing breast cancer in females and prostate cancer in males. This milk
may contain bacteria or pus cells causing infection. Milk for tea and coffeee is okay
but a glassful of milk may be risky. A heart patient shouldn't drink milk.

Fibre is good for health:
Fibre is the insoluble roughage in vegetables and skin of grains, fruits and legumes.
itis also the soluble gel-like substance abundant in beans, oils and fruits.

Fibre moves food along our long intestinal tract and prevents constipation and diarrhoea
and other diseases of colon.

It protects against several types of cancer, diabetes, obesity and heart disease.
Soluble fibre reduces cholestrol by binding to bile acids and causes its excretion.

Adding 5 to 10 gms. of fibre per day can reduce cholestrol by 5 points and in turn
reduces the risk of heart disease by 10%, therefore every person should eat atleast
10 gms of fibre daily.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 11 - English

