p)

Ly)

s)

t)

u)

v)

Heart blood deficiency in middle age transform into heart yin deficiency in old
age. It causes restlessness insomnia, excessive dreams, patient suffer from low
fever in the evening, night sweating. All causes are heart yin deficiency. Hurry

worry are the basic factors of Heart yin Deficiency Thus see the symptoms
of aged & old people and treat heart yin deficiency.
Emotional problems such as chronic anxiety, constant worry and depression

leads to stagnation of Qi for which may further cause Heart fire or Liver fire.
Symptoms of heart fire is a bitter mouth in the moming where as that of liver fire is
a bitter mouth for all days.
The face becomes red due to heart fire, red ulcers may appear on the tongue.
The patient may show sings of mania.
Generally liver fire increases first & then heart fire goes up. Mental restlessness
also increases.
When phlegm gets into the heart it causes obstruction . in allopathy it is called
coronary heart disease. Excessive phlegm is formed because of spleen Qi
deficiency. Obstruction increases heat, which causes periodic mania & depression
in patients. Body of tongue remains red with a yellow covering. Hot greasy food
items give rise to such condition. Treat for phlegm fire harassing the heart for
good results.
Insmall babies, obstruction in the heart by the phlegm may make the child mentally
retarded with difficulty in speech. Treat for phlegm misting the mind in such cases.
In adults, if heart has obstruction because of phlegm & the patient is paralytic,
aphasia may follow or the patient many slip into coma. Treat for phlegm misting
the mind.
when patient has heart yang deficiency, blood obstructs the heart. Its symptoms
are fullness and heaviness in the chest with stabbing pain. Itis called the angina
pain which radiates to arm through the heart & pericardium meridian. So treat for
heart blood stagnation, it can handle the angina pain.

Q00

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 11 - English

