Acidity - (Hyper Acidity) :

Today every person is worried by the digestion related problems of the stomach,
acidity caused by over eating during marriages, belching sounds in the stomach and gas
disease. Some are worried by the loose motion caused by indigestion and some by
constipation. Some have pain on the left side of the stomach and some on the right
side. Some have pain before eating and some after eating. Some do not feel hungry and
some have the problem of gastritis. Some disorders are related to local/organ near by
while others involve the whole abdomen. What we are trying to tell you is that stomach
defects have spread to much that many people are affected by it. Nowadays besides
having scientific, the age is fashionable, of modem thinking and new beliefs. The routine
of day, night and as per seasons is not under the control of the man of this era. Today's
man is living like a machine in the polluted atmosphere caused by physical, mental and
industrial toxifications. He neither has food at right time or clean, healthy and balanced
diet. Therefore the race of life, eating of fast food and more spicy or oily food is
increasing. Eating of cold ice-cream after hot food has become a modern culture. As
the trend of eating food not according to the digestive path is increasing likerwise in
the modern time stomach diseases are increasing which are a result of modern
civilization.

It is said that when god was creating man he found that his creation is lazy,
disobedient, without production and though alive behavs like dead.-God felt very bad
about his creation. After that he examined his creation many times and after thinking he
placed the stomach organ inside his creation. As soon as the stomach was placed this
previous inactive creation became active hard working and began making effort to earn
for his living. Because of this stomach, man became the best creation of god and the
stomach become the supremo for man.

“It is said that in order to fill this stomach many types of knowledge, technology
and mény types of trade became the means of earning. Man does all these activities in
order to fill his stomach.

If our stomach completes its work rightly our body is disease free and if it does
not work rightly it becomes the cause of many types of diseases. Therefore special
attention should he given to keep the stomach disease free and the defects related to it
should he treated. In order to make our body work there are various organs and systems
like digestive, circulatory, nevous, respiratory, integumentory, reproductive, endocrine
