system etc. Among them digestive system is best because it makes the systems work
and gives them energy. It starts from mouth and ends at anus. In it the food first reaches
the mouth where it is churned by the teeth. This food comes into the stomach and
digests slowely; it then gets absorbed by the intestines by the secretions of lives,
Pancreas and Gall Bladder. Then it goes to the last organ of the digestive system-anus.
Through these intestines all the activity of digestion complete and in the end through
waste and urine, left part is thrown out of the anus. The digested part of the food gives
energy to the whole body. If this whole process takes place rightly then our body is
healthy and if some problem comes many types of diseases are produced.

In this digestive act the most important thing is the fire of the stomach which is
also called gastic acid. When the fire of the stomach or the secretion of the gastric
acid increases (acidity), it is known by, symptoms the disease produces, hence the
cause and treatment is understood in detail through this article.

Acidity actually is the imbalance between the protection system of stomach and
hydrochloric acid that has come out from the stomach. In order to break the food taken
by us during digestion into small parts stomach produces an acid known as hydrochloric
acid (HCI). But when due to some known or unknown causes this production increases, _
then this increased acid is known as (hyperacidity) which in common language is known
as acidity. By this acidity the patient sees symptoms ljke vomiting, burning sensation
in stomach, chest and neck and increased appetite. Likewise when the fire of the stomach
or secretion of the acid decreases (indigestion) the patient has less appetite, has all the
same symptoms like burning sensation in stomach, chest and neck and vomiting, Here
we want to say that in all stomach diseases most of the symptoms are same like
indigestion, filling of gas in stomach, burning in neck, Chest and stomach, not feeling
hungry, coming of water in mouth, belching, body becomes weak and thin, Stomach
becomes heavy after eating food, bloated abdomen, eyes going inside, collapse of
checks, pain in all the organs of the body, swelling in hands and legs etc.

In these stomach diseases generally the symptoms of many diseases are similar
upto a certain level due to which, in knowing it and curing it, generally patient and
doctor both are bluffed. Therefore its treatment in various forms, the diagnosis and
excellence of the doctor is very important. Therefore the therapists should cure acidity
and choose the related points after thinking so that the patient gets whole benefit.

Actorty INQTGES TI ON

wae Less BpeeTLTE
BuRnt Ne SESHS ATEN LIN STU MACH

CWEST LE WECE

TNchehsen PPTL Te
