Dyspepsia :

Decrease in the fire situated in the stomach is known as dyspepsia. In it the digestion
of little amount of food does not take place properly due to which important work in
the body is not proper and by it ras, blood and other tissues do not get nousished.

Ayurved tells that hypo acidity is related to kaph. According to it.
e Increase of vat defect creates toxic fire.

e Increase of pitt defect creates pungent fire.

e Increase of kaph defect creates low fire.

In order to get rid of these defects it is said to pay attention on food, daily routine,
night routine and weather conditions.

Due to the lessening of stomach heat the food liquid present in stomach and
duodenum is not wholly cooked. This uncooked food liquid is called 'aam'. This 'aam'
poisons the body and makes it dirty.

Opposite food (honey and warm water, equal amount of honey and ghee, equally
mixing two oily things, honey and some oily thing, ghee, oil etc., milk and oil, milk and
lemon, milk and salt, milk and curd, milk and banana, curd and banana, curd and hot things,
butter milk and banana these are some those combinations which we are using quite
often while Ayurved has prohibiled it. (SfrWNE1 -

After eating food quickly taking food again, tendency of Eating food again before
the digestion of food taken earlier, heavy, dry, non-likeable, creating constipation, having
the tendency of intaking the food causing burn; Remaining unhappy due to kaam, krodh,
lobh, moha, jealousy, sorrow, abhiman and fear and eating food that is also not
completely cooked changes into uncooked ras or 'aam’.

In its causes not eating food the whole day, stopping hunger and thirst, not eating
food on time, eating more than required food, sleeping during day, drinking of water in
large amount or the tendency of drinking water very frequently, tendency of eating food
on having indigestion, sometimes more sometimes less, eating food on time or
sometimes not at time, eating of polluted food, decrease of digestive fire in body by
excessive use of food, eating stomach full of breakfast in the morning whether we are

(3)
