Certain medical conditions can also make patients susceptible to bleeding. These
are conditions that affect the normal “Hemostatic”’ functions of the body. Hemostasis
involves several components. The main components of the hemostatic system include
platelets and the coagulation system.

Platelets are small blood components that form a plug in the blood veessel
wall that stops bleeding. Platelets also produce a variety of substances that stimulate
the production of a blood clot. One of the most common causes of increased bleeding
risk is exposure to Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (or “NSAIDs”.

There are several named coagulation factors that interact in a complex way to
form blood clots, as discussed in the article on coagulation. Deficiencies of coagulation
factors are associated with clinical bleeding. For instance, deficiency of Factor VIII
causes classic Hemophilia A while deficiencies of Factor IX cause “Christmas disease”
(Hemophilia B). Antibodies to Factor VIII can also inactivate the Factor VII and
precipitate bleeding that is very difficult to control. This is a rare condition that is
most likely to occur in older patients and in those with autoimmune diseases. Von
Willebrand diseae is another common bleeding disorder. It is caused by a deficiency of
or abnormal function of the “von Willebrand” factor, which is involved in platelet
activation. Deficiencies in other factors, such as Factor XIII or Factor VII are
occasionally seen, but may not be associated with severe bleeding and are not as
commonly diagnosed.

In addition to NSAID-related bleeding, another common cause of bleeding is that
related to the medication. The medication needs to be closely monitored as the bleeding
risk can be markedly increased by interactions with other medications. Warfarin acts
by inhibiting the production of Vitamin K in the gut. Vitamin K is required for the
production of the clotting Factors II, VII. [X and X in the Liver. One of th most common
cause of warfarin related bleeding is taking antibiotics. The gut bacteria make vitamin
K and are killed by antibiotics. This decreases vitamin K levels and therefore the
production of these clotting factors.

Deficiencies of platelet function may require platelet transfusion while
deficiencies of clotting factors may require transfusion of either fresh frozen plasma
or specific clotting factors, such as Factor VIII for patients with hemophilia.
