Chapter

Parkinson’s Disease

Parkinson's disease is a slowly progressive degenerative disorder of the nervous sys-
tem characterised by tremor when muscles are at rest (resting tremors), slowness of the
voluntary movements and increased muscle tone (rigidity).

It commonly begins between the age 50 and 79, Tara a4 8 aiftie a & at cafepal 4 va
@ Parkinson's disease état 2!

In Parkinson's disease, nerve cells in basal ganglia degenerate, reducing the produc-
tion of dopamine. As a result, the basal ganglia cannot smooth out movements as they
normally do, leading to tremor, incoordination and slowed and reduced movement
(bradykinesia).

O Symptoms of Parkinson's disease :

i)

ii)
it)
iv)
v)

vi)
vii)
viii)

ix)
»)

It begins with a coarse, rhythmic tremor in the hand while the hand is at rest.
The tremor decreases when the hand is moving purposefully and disappears
completely during sleep.

Emotional stress or fatigue may increase the tremor.

The tremor may eventually progress to the other hand, the arms and the legs.
A tremor may also affect the jaws, tongue, forehead and eyelids.

Other early symptoms may include a reduced sense of smell, reduced body
movements, difficulty walking, a lack of facial expression with infrequent bleeding.
The sense of smell appears to be reduced partly because people with
Parkinson's disease have difficulty sniffling. Sniffling is deliberate breathing in
large amount of air.

Muscles become rigid impairing movement when the forearm is bent back or
straightened out by another person, the movement may feel stiff and ratchet
like.

The movements become slow and difficult to initiate and the mobility is de-
creased.

Stiffness and decreased mobility may contribute to muscle ache and fatigue.
The small muscles of hands are often impaired, daily tasks such as buttoning
the shirt and tying shoelaces, become increasingly harder.

Most people with Parkinson's disease have shaky, tiny handwriting.

A Treatise on 24
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 19

