Mixed deficient and excess condition cause tiredness due to weakness and
obstruction. Excess condition also causes tiredness. For example if liver qi is
stagnant, the proper direction of movement and circulation of Qi is impaired. It also
results in tiredness hence we must known that tiredness may be caused by
deficiency but also from the impairement and circulation of Qi caused by liver Qi stagnation.

Chronic tiredness may be caused by following excess conditions :
i) Liver Qi stagnation

ii) Liver fire blazing

iil) Liver yang rising

iv) _ Liver wind rising

v) Due to excess phlegm

vi) | Due to excess humidity

First four conditions involve liver. In all the four conditions the liver function of smooth

flow of Qi in all directions in impaired and hence there is tiredness.

Excess phlegum and dampness are very common causes of tiredness :

It the tiredness is due to deficiency of spleen the phlegm is in the initial stage of

formation. But when the phlegm is already formed, this is an excess condition. It

causes chronic tiredness while treating tiredness one should follow the following :

i) Differentiate whether tiredness is caused by a deficiency or excess condition.

ii) It the tiredness is due to deficient condition, identify whether it is deficiency of Qi,
yang, blood or yin. This will help in doing successful treatment.

iii) After differentiating the four types of deficiencies, identify the organ involved.

iv) Spleen deficiency is most frequently responsible for chronic tiredness.

Spleen deficiency accompanies a stomach deficiency also both of spleen and
stomach produces Qi and blood. It both are deficient, there will be deficiency of
Qi and blood, which will cause tiredness.

v) _ Liver blood deficiency is frequent cause of chronic tiredness. Liver regulates the
volume of blood according to activity. The flow of blood back to liver during rest
has a tonifying effect on the body and the energy is recouped. A short period of
rest by lying down in the day time helps the body to recoup the energy. This
removes tiredness
