P6,Sp4/: These two points together opens the penetrating vessel, when there
is excess in stomach with stagnation of food in the epigastrium

causing fullness and distension & rebillious stomach Qi Hd: aig
Grr gar Hort sara 4 a sawH TE SHG Te SY SY AR ented +
@ cen amare 4 RN, ward ed Get at aT P 6 Led Sp4 land
aor oem Ge F amt St SR ag SH & TMT AR Ud TAT TCHTAT

ate et on 21

St 201 It resolves the food accumulation & relieves fullness.

St21/ It is the door of the stomach. It descends the food. It resolves food
accumulation. It is suitable in stomach excess conditions. It stops
epigastric pain effectively.

st254 It is the front shu point of large intestine. It promotes bowel
movement and hence, resolves retention of food.

St44,45/: These are distal points. Sedation of these two points stop epigastric
pain due to excess in stomach with obstructions & rebellious Qi.

cv 134 It subdues rebellious Qi and relieves belching, sour regurgitation,
nausea & vomiting.

cv10l : \t augments descention of stomach Qi.

Special Notes :

If the retention of food is not cured within a short time by above treatment, advise the
patient to fast for a few days. Even if the retention of food is relieved, the patient should
by advised to reduce the food intakes and should eat easily digestable foods.

The therapists should know that there can be mixed deficiency excess symptoms
also. On one side there may be spleen Qi deficiency causing poor appetite, mild
epigastric pain, bleeding in between periods (spleen not controlling blood), On the
other side there can be excess condition due to retention of food producting constipation,
nausea, epigastric pain which is worse on pressure & on lying down. In this case tone
spleen Qi by toning St 36, Sp 6, 3, UB 20, 21, CV 12. Sedate the excess by sedating
CV 11, St21, 40, P 6. These two treatments will take care of both deficiency & excess
conditions. Hence, the therapists have to prepare their own treatment protocols
according to various symptom of the patients.
