Law of Yuan Source or Organ Source Point

Characteristics of Organ source points :

t

Vital energy is in excess on these points. Organ Source point of every meridian is its
master point.

On these points energy (Qi) transforms from yin to yang and yang to yin.

Every Yuan Source point is connected with Luo Connecting Point of couple meridian
by a collateral branch.

Yuan Source points are also known as test points. One can test the bio energy flow on
these points to understand the vitality of the related organ.

On Yuan Source point, there is a battery and inverter of each organ, which charges on
the time of organ clock. In the case of emergency this battery supplies bio energy to
related organ. For example- H7 is the Yuan Source Point for heart. When doctor sug-
gests the patient to use the pace-maker, then in that case in acupressure same treat-
ment can be given by putting the star magnet on H7.

Yuan Source points are also called as Original Qi points. It is that energy source,
which we have got as prenatal energy since birth. It is also known as inborn stamina
or energy reserve. As though it is believed in acupuncture that prenatal energy we get
from kidneys. So for prenatal problems treat kidneys. World renowned scholar YEL-
LOW EMPEROR discovered that kidneys only regulates the water element in the
body and for the regulation of other energies nature has given prenatal energy in the
form of Organ Source Point on every meridian for that particular organ as well as for
other related five elements to that organ. So for the treatment of chronic diseases use
Organ Source Points as per the need.

Organ Source Point of yin organs is also Shu Stream Points for yin organs, from
where the bio energy flows continuously.

“If one of the five orbs is affected by disease, this must show on the twelve originals.
Since at each original a specific form of energy comes to the surface, its origin may be
clearly perceived and by its correspondence we come to know which of thé five horreal
orbs has been affected.” “Chapter of Lingshu”
“If any of the five Horreal(yin) or the six aulic orbs (yang) is affected by disease, for
therapy we shall by all means choose the corresponding originals”

“66% objection in the Nanjing”
