Yuan Source or
oJ Ss

8. Treatment on Organ Source point balances the bio energy of that organ. For example-
If there is deficiency of Qi in the kidneys treatment on K3 (Organ Source Point) of
kidney tonifies the kidneys.

9.  Tonification point of Kidney is K7. If kidney is underactive then treatment on K7 would
do the tonification of kidney. But in practical it is seen that the real tonification is always
fully effective once K3 is treated along with K7.

10. Original energy of yin organs is an earthly energy decided by the deeds of our previ-
ous life. That is why for yin organs earth points are the Organ Source Points. For
example, Liv3 earth point of Liver is its Organ Source Point.

11. Original energy of yang organs is that God given energy which we extract by our
deeds in this very life and from that we get divine energies.

12. As earthing is very important in electricity supplies, so Organ source points are very
important for the treatment of yin organs.

As earthing accurates the fluctuations of electricity supplies and tube light & other
electric appliance shines brightly, in the same manner treatment on Organ Source point
enhances the working capacity of yin organs. Yin bio energy comes from earth, so first it
can be seen in the form of well, then it takes the form of spring, then stream, then river and
then in the last in the form of sea. Yang energy which is heavenly energy, comes from the
sky can be seen in the form of rain water, sunlight and heat etc. As soon as this yang
energy comes to the earth converts into stream, then river, then sea, and from the sea into
awell through underground water flow and in the last in the form of spring. This divine yang
energy we get continuously, accordingly and formally. Sometimes this energy comes in the
form of rain water and sometimes in the form of sun-heat or even in other forms. The supply
of this energy varies. Sometimes we get more of it and sometimes comparatively in lesser
quantity. For example- sometimes rains are heavy and sometimes less. In the same way
sun rays are stronger in summers in comparison to winter. Our body continuously gets yin
and yang energies. Receiving Station Antenna is GV20 (Source point of all Source points).
All 12 Organ Source points work as local antenna. Thunderbolts come down from sky and
to protect the house from that we put iron rods from earth to roof in the house, in the same
manner, GV26 & K1 protect us from the excess energy. If faintness happens because of
excess energy or deficient energy, treat GV26 & K1. Sanitary vent are been made on the
roof of the house for the bad smell. This bad smell is yang energy and urine-stool is yin
energy. Yin energy releases on earth and yang energy in the sky.

<P)
