Luo Connecting

Law of Luo Connecting Points or Passage Poing

Luo connecting points or passage points are places where a communication exists
between a pair of yin and yang channels of an element. Every meridian has one passage
point. These points are also called Junction point. Every element has one coupled meridian.
In this couple one will be yin meridian and the other would be yang meridian. For example in
fire meridian heart meridian and small intestine meridian are in the form of a couple meridian.
In this heart meridian is yin meridian and small intestine is yang meridian. These both
meridians are connected to each other with passage point. H65 is the passage point for
heart meridian and Si7 is the passage point for small intestine meridian. Treatment on H5
transfers energy from small intestine to heart. And treatment on Si7 transfers energy from
heart to small intestine. If the bio energy is excess in small intestine and lesser in heart,
then ireatment on the passage point of the heart ie. H5 balances energy in both the organs.

i)  Ifhusband has shortage or deficit of energy, take it from the wife.

iil) If wife has shortage or deficit of energy, take it from the husband.

How to do this transfer?

By pressing the passage point/ luo connecting point of the deficient organ.

Example:

i) If Heart is-deficient : press H 5 passage point for heart.

Bio energy will flow from small intestine to heart. H 5 will draw energy from Si 7.

i) If small intestine is deficient press Si 7 passage point of small intestine.

Bio energy will flow from heart to small intestine. Si7 will draw energy from H 5.

Other therapeutic uses of Passage point :

i)  Ifthere is pain or any skin problem or boil etc. at or near H 5, press Si 7.

i) Ifthe energy is imbalanced in one element of two paired meridians and energy is
excess in one organ and deficient in other one, then tonification of the passage
point of deficient organ make balance of energy in both the organs. Few scholars
say that sedation of the passage point of excess energy organ makes balance of
energy in both the organs. Sedation transfers the excess energy to partner organ

on its own.
