Theory of Five Elements

Human body is made of Five Elements- Earth, Water, Fire, Wind and Sky. If any of
these element gets imbalanced; means the quantity of that particular element increases or
decreases in body, it results in illness and the person starts feeling dis-ease. In this case,
if we do the balancing of that particular imbalanced element, we can put a control on the
illness. For example, if water element in a body increases will result in swelling in different
parts of body organs and pressure applied to skin result in a indentation. By decreasing the
water element, one can treat the swelling of the body as well. In the same manner, if the
earth element increases in the body can result in flabbiness and fat. In this case, balancing
of earth element in body can reduce the body fat. For all this, one needs to know all those
acupressure and acupuncture points, on which the treatment would result in balancing of
the five elements. Five Element Theory- helps in this knowledge.

We further need to know, our body organs which are related to these five elements.
Treatment on these organs can make a balance between the five elements of the body.

There is also a need to understand those Endocrine Glands, which secrete different
hormones and helps in the balancing of five elements in the body.

By balancing these five elements in our body, we can treat all new and old, simple or
complicated diseases. It enhances the immune system, would prevent the diseases in
future. Even with this five element theory, we can control the fatal diseases of the forthcoming
centuries. There is a definite need to know the elements and their importance in body
functioning. There is also a need to know that which organ is imbalanced in our body and
the quantum of imbalance? Type of imbalance and whether this imbalance is new or old?
Imbalance for past so long can be termed as Chronic and new one can be as Acute. If the
imbalance is chronic then what should be the treatment and if it is acute then what should
be the line of treatment?

According to Chinese Theory the Five Elements from which heaven, earth and human
are made, they are- Water, wood, Fire, Earth and Metal. Now we need to know that in our
body what element is related to which organ? :

<>)
