ii)

iv)

In natural yin diseases mere touching on Mu Front points gives immense pain.
For example, in heart disease, the alarm point of heart CV14, which is located
one inch under the sternum, will be very painful while giving the pressure. .It
diagnoses the disease in the organ. Sometimes alarm point pains without even
touching. This denotes clearly that there is some disease in the related organ.

Itis a general belief that alarm point is point of tonification. If energy is deficient in
organ then treatment on alarm point tonfies the related meridian and its own
meridian.

Alarm point can also be used for the sedation of organ. Treatment should be
given for only few “seconds. Like- if there is is pain in upper abdomen and nausea
then the alarm point Cv12 of stomach would be painful and treatment on this point
for few seconds would cure the diseases but for the treatment of root disease
other related points are also to be treated.

Back Shu points are also known as Associated points.

Qi Bu: If you press with your fingers on these points, the pain of the corresponding
organ is immediately relieved. “Nei Zing Ch. 51”

Fundamentals of Back Shu or Associated points :

1.
2.

Classically the Back Shu points are points of sedation.

These points have a calming effect & hence are used in yang diseases such as
over excitement, fever etc.

Practically it has been noticed that back shu points are equally good for tonification,
for example UB 23 is very effective in the treatment of underactive kidney.

Why vertebras of spine get displaced and disc prolapse happens? The main
reason is the disease in the concerned organ. If there is disease in descending
colon then the pain will be at the left side of UB 25 i.e. back shu point of large
intestine. If this problem is not treated on time then the muscles around this would
also be stretched and the fourth vertebra of spine would shift to the left side and
result in slip disc. Root disease is of descending colon and the resultant disease
is slip disc and after that it even takes the form of lumbago and sciatica. So a little
shift in the fourth vertebra of lumber can get cured by the treatment on UB 25. But
