b) All the Jing Well points of Yin Meridians of leg are the first point of their
respective meridians. For example —Sp1, Liv1, K1

c) All the Jing Well points of Yang Meridians of hand are the first point of their
respective meridians. For example —Li1, TW 1, Si1

d) All the Jing Well points of Yang Meridians of leg are the last point of their
respective meridians. For example — St45, GB 44, UB 67

Fundamentals :

When exchange of bio energy and body fluids between above-below & surface-depth
of human bodies has been impaired there will be disease in midriff. Midriff includes chest,
diaphragm and plexus. Nature of trouble in midriff will be plethoric sensations. This is due to
either Congestions or Indigestions.

Pain on the midriff can be because of Angina pain, muscular pain or any other type of
pain. The successful examination of which pain is due to angina and which pain is due to
any other reason has been carried out in China since past ‘ive thousand years on Jing Well
points

In the 12" Century during the rule of Ming dynasty, Gao Wu, the learned scholar of
Acupuncture, wrote a classified analysis of elements of ‘Acu Moxi Therapy’ for the benefit
of future generations. That analysis shows how to diagnose or understand the different
kinds of pain like angina pain, muscular pain, gastric pain, bronchial pain, arthritic pain and
even their reason of occurrence. It can be because of two reasons — congestion or
indigestion.

When in any meridian bio energy increases or reduces in too much quantity, it results
in emergency situation and the indication of the disease would be like a storm with pain and
restlessness. If bio energy reduces too much then there will be feeling of numbness in
fingers of hands and feet. It can even lead to paralysis or unconsciousness etc. In the
same manner, if the bio energy increases too much, it can result in pain, restlessness,
haemorrhage, fainting etc.

1) Gall Bladder :

If the pulse is stringy, patient is fond of cleanliness and is short tempered then the
patient is of Gall Bladder Constitution. If this kind of patient is having problem in midriff
as well as there is pain between the Ribs and lleum at the side of the body (flank) and
