2)

3)

even in this acute condition of disease the patient is asking for the cleanliness of bed
and room then the treatment should be on GB44. If there is fever also then treat GB43.
If patient's bone joints are weak, flaccid and numb, then the treatment would be on
GB41. If there is coldness in the body of the patient and the patient is complaining of
breathlessness, cough then treat GB 38. If the extremities of patient are cold and the
patient is also experiencing belching, hiccups, vomiting, trembling of hands & legs
then treat GB34.

Generally midriff pain in this type of patient is because of muscular trouble. While it
may look like angina pain, actually it is not angina pain.

We can understand from the table given in the book named ‘Synopsis of Florilegium of
Acupuncture Therapy’ that which kind of pain is angina which is caused by heart,
Small Intestine, Pericardium or Triple Warmer and what should be the points for
treatment. In China, this table is being taught to all Acupuncture learners.

Liver:

If a patient is having following symptoms then his midriff pain is not the angina pain:
Patient's body is weak and the muscles are deteriorating .

Feeling spasms in calves and pain around the naval area.

Numb extremities, stringy pulse and constipation .

This kind of patient must be having a spastic pain because of deficient energy. Treat
Liv 1 (Jing Well Point). In the case of cold feeling, treat Liv2. If cramps and spasms are
there, then the treatment would be on Liv3. If there is rheumatic pain of the joints of the
extremities or even for any other kind of pain in the body, treat Liv3. If patient is
complaining for coughing, infection, breathlessness, treat Liv4. If a patient is having
the symptoms of vomiting, belching, hiccups, flatulence, trembling of extremities,
occasional fever, heat in the body, cold extremities, then the treatment would be on
Liv8.

Small Intestine :

If the pulse of the patient is superficial and flooding and the face is flushing, the mouth
is dry, patient is very social and can laugh even on small matters then the treatment
would be on Shu Points of Small Intestine. One can also complain for pain near or
around the right side of naval in this type of case.
