N

Most underactive time of the day 3:00 to 5:00pm

Balancing foods Rice, barley, oats, water, peaches,
garlic, onion, apricot, milk, pear,
grapes.. Vit. A, B, D, E, Magnesium,
Potassium, Iron, Peanuts etc.

Sedating food Garlic, tea, chestnuts, Radishes,
mint, ginger etc.

5. Activating food Ginger, mustard, gram etc.

bod

bad

Responsible Sounds - coughing, sneezing, sobbing, weeping, lamenting,
wailing.

IlIness/craving - Green Peas, lemon, Radish, tomatoes, pungent/spicy foods
etc.

Related emotions — Grief, anxiety, resentment, sorrow, feeling of enslavement,
claustrophobia, does not bend, but breaks instead, desire to over achieve, feeling of
helplessness, worry, rigidity of both body & mind (inflexibility), worry, depression,
melancholic, Sadness, difficulty in walking, rigidity of both hands and with inflexibility,
pessimism of rhythm, sense of sympathy, compassion.

Bodily parts — Skin, nostrils(internal part only), Thumb, Throat, teeth, bodily hairs,
breathing pathway, control of temperature via perspiration, fluid channels, mucous,
Bronchi, trachea, larynx, sinuses, sweat glands.

The most obvious purpose of lung is intake of oxygen and expel carbon dioxide.
But it also serves many other functions.

Symptoms - These make the basis for diagnosis and treatment. They include
symptoms indicating balancing state or deficiency or excess. As the seeds treatment
does not require any tone/ sedate separately, they are used just to balance by pressure.
When required in excess/ deficient conditions, treatment by micro magnets by inference
or by knowledge of symptoms of under or hyper activity may be the basis of selection
of tonification/ sedation either by colour or bipolar magnets .

Common symptoms are - Chest congestion , coughing, pain or discomfort upon
deep inhaling and exhaling, hemorrhoids (Piles), anguish, helplessness, sinus, nasal
congestion, hoarseness of voice, night sweating, tries to avoid crowd, body smells
sharp, troublesome elbow.

< Chinese Meridian in Ayurvedic Mould - Vol. 1 CM in AM (3)

