This power of assimilation and digestion, in a simple way corresponds to the vital
force, reviewing itself day by day. This is why, in the Chinese medical literature, the
spleen meridian came to be called the “ root of the acquired constitution”. It had been
called the “ the seat of constructive energy’. In everyday life, the intact function of spleen
and stomach meridian is evident in the storage and in the metabolism of food as well
as distribution of fluids and juices but it is also evident by the digestion of sensory
impression, in the accomplishment of mental work and above all in harmonizing and
balancing the function of all other meridians.

Modern school of Acupuncture/ Acupressure describes spleen function parallel to
that of pancreas. Therefore hereinafter, we may call paired organs as spleen/ Pancreas
and stomach.

Its most active / sensitive time of the day is between 9:00 to 11:00 AM, which is
considered the best time of the day for taking food. The state of the lymph glands and
Nodes are dependent upon the balance of the spleen/ pancreas team. This team of
organ is considered to nourish all other organs and functions. This team of organs is
also coined as father of sense of self (Ego).

These organs are the home of stubbomness and persistence, so represents one’s
sense of loyalty and rigidity - both mentally and physically (also a lung team
characteristic). We can think in terms of high and low expression of some organ —
controlled drive. In this case loyalty is the higher expression while clinginess would be
its low expression.

This team of organ is responsible for conversion of food into the sludge (chyme)
from which we extract our day to day energy. This energy is not original energy, but
“replacement” energy that is lost through our daily living. Blood, other digestive functions
and lymph controls are also associated with this organ team.

Cold hand and feet may be related to an imbalance between stomach and spleen/
pancreas (as well as colon and lungs). Other expression of this imbalance could be
excessive sympathy, a strong desire for (or avoidance of ) sitting down, difficulty in
moving the big toe, or any problem of big toe, problem of thigh and groin, Obsessive
behavior or vanity.

Chinese Meridian in Ayurvedic Mould - Vol. 1 CM in AM )

