Aprimary function of the heart team is the development of blood by duodenum,
part of small intestine and its transportation system. The heart controls life and
movement. According to TCM conceptit is also the centre or “ King” of our emotional
existence, so that any extreme emotion, injures and afflicts the heart and its mate,
along with the other organ team, specifically associated with the excessive emotions
being suffered.

A person who has no zest for being alive is the manifestation of symptoms of
suffering from a malfunction of the heart and its team. The heart is also supreme govemor
of the thought and rational behavior hence irrational thoughts and activities are related
to the heart.Healthy heart reflects by sense of pleasure and joy, contrary to it sorrow
injures to the heart team emotionally.

In nut and shell, despite spleen — stomach relate with taste, also tongue, taste and
speech are associated with the heart team. Hence problems of speaking — specially
chattering, rapidly without saying much, stuttering, being gushy, dramatic or exuberant
in speech are indications of the heart team imbalance.

Symptoms of Imbalance of heart energy — Swelling of the nose/palms and
ankles, heel pain, cleft tongue , warts on the tongue tip and grey and black tongue,
troublesome elbow (along meridian pathway), night sweating, hot and sweaty palms,
high blood pressure, stuttering, hot flashes, excessive laughter and excitement, purple
lips, blue circles around eye, body smells burnt or scorched, hiccups, discomfort in
lying down, cannot discern between all tastes.

Hyper active heart - Constriction in heart, dramatic gestures, reddish
complexion, excessive palpitation and perspiration, fast speech, hysteria, desires cold
drinks, ulceration on the tip of tongue, mouth sores, shoulders pain etc.

Under active symptoms - sorrowful behavior, shortness of breath, sudden
speechlessness, listlessness, heaviness and fullness in chest, dangerous low BP,
sense of shock, fatigue, mental dullness, low will power, strong palpitations, angina,
myocardial infarctions, sweaty palms.

Associated bodily parts/physiological functions Little finger, vascular
system, tongue, vocal cords, outside portion of the nose, perspiration etc.

Qualities-Tranquility, gentleness, cohesiveness of personality, spirit, love, integrity,
sense of good taste, optimism, control of thoughts, emotional and spiritual growth,
zestful life, wisdom, good judgment, conscience, spirituality.

C Chinese Meridian in Ayurvedic Mould - Vol. 1 CM in AM (61)

