(H) Urinary bladder

Being mate of kidneys— Helps regulate the flow of the body's water/ fluids. This
is a most important job. Physically, urinary bladder stores and releases surplus fluids
(as urine). Closely associated with the function is that of sexual drive, as mentioned
earlier, the entire sexual process is closely associated with the kidney / urinary bladder
team.

Meridian runs from head to toe through spinal column, therefore, its impact is on
the most part of the spinal column, back hip and leg.

General symptoms- Yawning, trembling of extremities, blackish complexion etc.

Hyperactive symptoms- Pain in spinal column, pain in waist, down legs, worries
over small details, stress, nervousness, restlessness, hypersensitivity, pain and
stiffness in the lower neck and upper back, heaviness in the back of the head near the
eyes, tension in shoulder muscles, tightness in the back of legs, frequent urination,
inflammation or pain in the bladder, prostate, lower abdomen, problems with the
autonomic nervous system.

Underactive symptoms- Pain in spinal column, strained nerves, stiffness and
sensitivity in the whole body, frequent complaining, feels frightened easily, night
sweating, anxiety, heaviness and discomfort in the eyes, nasal congestion, migraine
headaches (specially in the back of head), malfunctioning autonomic nervous system,
poor circulation specially in the lower abdomen and legs, frequent urination, back
tends to feel cold, frequent desire to bend the back, tightness in the legs, tension
below the navel, inflammation of the bladder, malfunctioning womb, feeling of painful
urination and sense of retained urine.

Associated Bodily Parts/ Physiological Functions— Helps regulate flow of
bodily water, storage of urine, little toe.

Manifestation of the qualities— Ambition, sense of awe.

Injury of the organ- Holding of urine, excess standing, lifting excessively heavy
objects.

Associated Birth month- August To September 7h,

Treatment joint- Both middle finger — Vata joints.

Note— Rest of the details are applicable as that of kidneys — its mate organ.

Chinese Meridian in Ayurvedic Mould - Vol. 1 CM in AM (#7)

