Similarly, if kidney symptoms seen present- poor movement of blood and fluids,
sexual imbalances, poor relationship with the opposite sex etc. In such case first
treatment on pericardium is required.

Since main function of the pericardium is circulation, the autonomic nervous system
is related to this function, as are many other functions which circulate energy or other
substances within the body mind.

Itis not a question of the amount of energy one feels so much, as it is the speed/
intensity of that life force circulating within the body/mind.

Shallow and dream- filled sleep is often related to pericardium imbalance, as are
rambling speech or cackling, hysteric laughter. Stiffness in the neck or inability to turn
the head easily, is likewise identified as a diagnostic symptom of malfunction.

General Symptoms- Loves too many individuals (specially sexually), trembling
fingers, too much internal heat (feels too hot inside), large pupils, shallow, dream filled
sleep, warm palms, swollen armpits, hiccups, trembling tongue.

Hyperactive symptoms- Light sleep, heavy head, painful heart, excessive joy,
hysteria, eyes jerky, many dreams, restlessness when sleep or awake, feels nervous
in social situations, concentrates abnormally on work, abnormal or excess emotions,
hypersensitivity, strong palpitations, HBP, dizziness, tires easily, poor circulation,
headaches, stiffness in the solar plexus, cardiac malfunctioning, lightness below the
navel, pain in stomach, frequent need to crack knuckles, and fingers, feverish palms.

Underactive symptoms— Cannot love anyone or maintain long relationships,
heavy head, poor sleep, dreams, fears high places, short of breath, stiffness, inability
to turn head, eyes slow moving, absent mindedness, squeezing, sensation around the
chest, LBP, easily fatigued, erratic blood pressure, pain in the chest and ribcage.

Associated bodily parts/physiological functions— Kidneys, UB, heart, SI,
circulation of blood, sexual drive, middle finger, cardiovascular system, autonomic
nervous system, tongue, vocal cords, taste buds circulation of bio energy, prevents
infective diseases, regulates speed of heart beat, difficulty in swallowing.

Manifestation of the Qualities— Love (including sexual desire) for members of
opposite sex, feelings of happiness and contentment.

Associated emotional/Personality functions— Happiness, sadness, protects
the heart from traumatic emotional distress, sexuality and sexual drive sorrow, grief,
hot/cold coordinator.

Chinese Meridian in Ayurvedic Mould - Vol. 1 CM in AM

