Whereas the pericardium's purpose is to control emotions and circulation, the
triple warmer's purpose as the name implies- is to create/sustain warmth (and
digestion). The body must maintain a precise range of temperature, otherwise
numerous symptoms- and eventually death will occur, if the temperature range is too
extreme.

It is predominantly a triangular interaction between the lungs/L! organ team
(controlling the temperature and digestion of air-gaseous digestion) in combination
with both the spleen/pancreas — stomach and liver/ Gall bladder team, all of which
compose the triple warmer.

Each pair of organ is essentially responsible for one third of the vital body area.
The lung team contains the upper third of the body, spleen/pancreas team controls the
middle third, and the Liver/GB team controls the lower third, making it responsible for
movement within the bowels or other evacuative function/e.g. pushing urine of the
bladder etc.

Emotionally, it is said that pericardium controls the intensity of one’s intimate love
life- both sexual and familial — while the TW controls one’s social existence beyond the
bedroom in home. TW personality afflicted may confine to bedroom, means concerned
with spouse and children, or home means concerned only with family members i.e.
parents, brothers and sisters etc. but least concerned with others beyond home. Means
it avoids social contact, otherwise when hot, afflicted by seeking social acceptance,
even at the expense of one’s own home or family. Typical TW malfunctions include
being “home proud” or dressing in clothes too expensive or too numerous- for one's
income.

Just as kidney or heart team, problems may also be of the pericardium, so
problems and symptoms of lung, Sp/Pancreas or Liver team malfunction - or even
those of the vital organs and glands in the body- may be similar or identical to those of
the TW.

One particularly vital function the TW performs, is the regulation of the lymphatic/
glandular system (a child of the SP/Pancreas — stomach team). This includes the
endocrine and ductless glands.

The triple warmer and its husband (Paired organ), the Pericardium, are thought to
be responsible, in most cases, for controlling broad, nonspecific human qualities such
as sense of humor. In a way, they also act as indicators for broad reaching symptoms

C Chinese Meridian in Ayurvedic Mould - Vol. 1 CM in AM (4 7)

