that have qualities of several different organ - team drives. Symptom of acute
malfunction within the TW could include belching (a Sp/Pn — St expression), coughing,
(Lung Expression) and/or flatulence (bowel gas- the expression of a distressed Liver
or Gall Bladder).

Coldness or heat — both physical or metaphysical (emotional) —are related to TW,
as are worrying, anxiety, decision making abilities (or problem). The depth of intimacy,
one is able to reach in his sexual relationships is thought to be controlled by this function,
as well as his general love of humanity.

General Symptoms- Bodily temperature variation (e.g. warm head, cold feet),
specially near surface of skin are deep heat or coldness, hot/cold flashes, coughing,
belching, flatulence, lack of memory, forgetfulness,, breast problem, vivid dreams, pain
in the middle of back, white ring around iris of eyes, pain at the corners of the eyes.

Hyperactive symptoms - Difficult hearing, pain in the shoulders and ears,
difficulty in cooling off, very cautious, hypertensive (Prone to HBP), tendency to clench
fists, lightness in arms, heaviness in head, nervous reaction to external changes or
heat, coldness, humidity, heaviness in chest, pain in the neck and shoulders and arms,
lymphatic inflammation, inflammation of the skin, inflammation of mucous membranes,
proneness to inflammation, itchy skin, inflammation in mouth, womb, gums, frequent
rashes.

Underactive symptoms- Being unsocial, feels cold all over, pain in temple,
difficulty in warming up.

Associated bodily parts/ Physiological functions - Lu, Li, Sp, St, Pn, Liv,
GB, Thyroid, hypothalamus, adrenal glands, skin, endocrine systems, ring fingers,
controls respiration, (unconscious desire to breathe), function of excretion.

Manifestations of qualities— Sociability and love of mankind, working well in
groups, personal warmth and radiance, sexual friendships, sense of humor.

Associated emotional/ Personality functions— Depth of personal relationship,
few specific qualities, This is involved with depth or heat and intensity of all emotions,
decision making ability, memory, sexual fire but not necessarily drive, addictions of
any sort.

(72) Chinese Meridian in Ayurvedic Mould - Vol. 1 CM in AM )

