Of these, anger and aggressive drive are the most apparent. However rational
intellectual activity is associated with liver functions, as are protecting our self against
insults or rebelling against inhuman treatment. In a state of deficiency, the liver produces
depression. All eye disorders, though partially are associated with the liver, as is the
condition of bruising too easily. Most allergies , too have their roots in a malfunctioning
liver often in association with the lungs team.

Rapid weight gain or loss specially in women just before menstrual period - is a
liver function, and of all the organs , the one team most responsible for a general
sense of well being is that of liver and GB. The governing of patience is ascribed to
this team. Impatience indicates Liver/ GB team imbalance.

When thwarted, the liver reacts, not only with aggression and shouting but weeping
that is associated with lung team. Liver plays vital functions. It is difficult to have a
sense of spirituality with a diseased liver. Perhaps impossible of all organs, only the
liver heals and regenerate itself rather easily.

Too much of an organ team associated, vocalized expressions whether singing
spleen, laughter and talking - heart team, shouting/ anger - liver, injures the organ
team. In fact knowing how to stimulate /sedate the appropriate organs with various
sounds, colours, and other ways, are healing or balancing techniques, the practice of
“energy medicine”.

General balancing symptoms- Tongue - violet/ green/ yellow, smelly feet,
constipation, diarrhoea, shouting, loud voice, hepatitis, tends to crave or avoid exercise,
bitter taste in mouth, problem lies between the eyebrows, cirrhosis, dizziness, night
blindness, mouth and tongue feeling sticky and foul, throat dry, flatulence, frequent
urination at night, many of the numerous kind headache, and itching, heartburn,
menstrual discomfort, proneness to insect bites, yearning for sour taste, breast problem,
fist or jaw clenching, eyes that water easily, hiccups, apprehension, insomnia, painful
armpits, muscular spasm, stiff joints, confused thinking, green blue cast of the
complexion.

Hyperactive symptoms- Cataract, nose bleeds, dizziness, overheating,
insomnia, aversion to heat, attraction to cold, indigestions, great fatigue, over
development of muscles, nose picking, very excitable, impulsive energy, can not stop
working until all finished, works hard, concentrates deeply, stubborness, tend to never
give up, works impatiently and impulsively until exhausted, easily affected emotionally,

Chinese Meridian in Ayurvedic Mould - Vol. 1 CM in AM i}

