machine. Apart from these GB treatment is intended for pain along the flanks, hip,
knee and ankle joints at the places wherever GB meridian traverses its pathways.

Itcan be visualised as a radiator in the vehicle of body-mind of human being. As
such heating and cooling in human body is governed by Gall Bladder. So arthritis of
the joints of the legs, cervical acute and chronic disorders, various types of headaches,
hyperacidity, gastritis, jaundice, other metabolic disorders, bowel movement, digestive
problems, digestion of fats, easily fatigue, eye disorders, dizziness, obesity, stiffness
in muscles, shoulder pain, heaviness in the head, craving for intake of sweets, allergies,
fist and jaw clenching, body smells rancid, easily bruised, hot or cold flashes, a sense
of bitterness in the mouth, humidity, easily frightened, neuralgia, proneness to insect
bite.

Metaphysical symptoms and manifestation of temperament— Dynamic,
dashing, pushing forwardness, making good decisions, aggressive drive - when
thwarted in its natural expression - reacts by creating emotional demands to control or
dominate a situation, becoming angry or shouting loudly, if demands not met eventually
in depression.

Irritability, crankiness (easily annoyed or angry), impatience, hardworking by
temperament, pays too much attention to small details, becomes easily upset.

Foods balancing, stimulating and sedating— are those in Liver case.

Associated bodily parts and physiological finding— Fourth toe, production
of bile, colour of stool, metabolism of fat, manufacture of glycogen, thyroid function
and sleep control.

Birth month— December 7th to January 7th

(M) Conception Vessel Meridian (CV or Ren Mo) and

Governing or DU Mo Channel (GV or DU)

Conception as name suggests is the meridian having connectivity with all meridians
through its mate (paired) meridian Governing Vessel (Du Mo). Unlike other meridians
left and right this meridian is “Central but front-back bisecting the body into two halves.
CV meridian substantiates energy to all other meridians whereas DU meridian governs
all organ meridians from the back. In other words, Chinese scholars identified many of
one alarm points of different meridians very valuable for diagnostic as well as treatment

purposes.

C Chinese Meridian in Ayurvedic Mould - Vol. 1 CM in AM (77)

