e Internal wind attacks the body through the meridian of the skin. It first fights with
the Defensive qi present near the skin. The starts feeling cold & does not like
wind. Due to the fight between the Extemal wind & Defensive qi, the body catches
fever.

e = This external wind produces choking in the throat & the patient feels itching &
uneasiness in the throat.

e@ Normally, the External wind alone does not attack the body; it brings with it
atmospheric cold or heat.

When external wind brings cold with it, it is called attack of wind cold.

When external wind brings heat with it, it is called attack of wind heat.

When in attacking wind cold, wind is more but cold is less, then the skin pores
are open, there is some sweating & the pulse is slow.

@ —Whenin attacking wind cold, wind quantity is less but quantity is more, then the
skin pores are closed, there is no sweating & pulse moves slowly.

@ When in attacking wind heat, wind quantity is more but quantity of heat is less,
then it is called ordinary Cold Heat.

@ When in attacking wind heat, wind quantity is less but quantity of heat is more,
then itis called Sunstroke.

Treatment :

If the first stage of fever, there is no thirst & no sweating but there is feeling
of cold & dislike of wind. Generally, immediately on disease, treatment on
Si 3 & UB 60 or UB 62 first stage of diseases is cured.

e

In the first stage of fever, treatment is given on Greater Yang Channel Axis
(Si & UB). ‘

In the first instance, by treating at UB 12, external wind is evacuated out of the
body; this is done by applying moxa or cupping or star magnet at UB 12. In this,
cupping is most effective. By treating on controller of yang i.e., GV 16, external
wind is removed out of the body. Specially when there is headache, then treatment
at GV 16 must be done.

When due to external attack, stiff neck occurs, then wind is evacuated by treating
at: Si3, UB 60, UB 10, UB 11, UB12 etc.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 >)
¥

