Treatment of Heart Excess Type Diseases

Phliegm Fire Harassing the Heart

© Mouth ulcers ‘© Mentalrestlessness  SoutingAveeping tendency
© Thirst © Palpitation © Depression
© Palpitation © Bittertaste © Tiredness
© Restlessness Insomnia © Aphasia
© Feelinghot ‘© Dreamdisturbedsleep © Slippingintocoma
© Insomnia © Getting started
@ Red/flushed face @ Excess anger
Dark colored wine or haematuria Excess laughter
e Bittertaste
 Redtongue Midline crack, red yellow coat
© Swollen and deep red tip of tongue © Swollen deep redtip
@ Midline crack reaching upto tip
Pulse Fast and Heavy Rapid and Heavy

The disease is caused by full heat excess| The disease is caused by excess fie and phlegm in heart.
inHeart. There are two types of diseases :

Heart yin deficiency increases empty Mental depression, tiredness and delirium it is caleld
heat. Heart's full heat excess can be seen Dian in China.

on the tongue. Ithas red, raised ulcers which | 2, Patient becomes aggressive - laughing, shouting,
are painful. White ulcers are caused by} —_ealing or weeping everythings excess. itis called
empty heat. Excess heat in heart causes Kuang. Dian is yin in nature, kuang is yang. The
mental disturbances, insomnia, depression] —_cause is heart phlegm fire. Treatment should be
and red face. In case of empty heat excess give accordingly or patient may slip into coma.
only cheeks becoms red. Heart full heat also Heavy, greasy food in excess may cause it or it
give a bitter taste in mouth in the morning may occur during excess heat in external
where as Liver fire makes mouth bitter environment.

whole day.

Heart full heat may cause burning in urine

which is red. Tongue is red, tip is deep red

and swollen. Years of stress, worrying and

depression causes all of there.

K6,Sp6t H7,8,9,CV15)

Calms the mind Expels phlegm
H7 Calms the mind H7,8,9,P7,UB15 : — Resolves Heartfire.
H8,9, : Resolve Heart Fire CV 15, Sp6, Liv3 Calms the mind
cv 15 : Reduces Heart heat and] GB 13, 15, Du24

calms the mind Liv2,3 . Resolves fire.

A Treatise on
206 Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 )

