Chapter

@0)

The food & fluid digested by stomach & spleen is received by small intestine. The
small intestine separates pure & impure products from that digested food & fluids. Real &
False, Good or Bad, Pure or Impure, Clean or Dirty, Liked or Disliked, Useful & Harmful
etc. are recognized by the small intestine. This recognition provides us with clear thinking.
And the clear thinking enables us to take a proper judgment & increases our power of
judgment. Gall Bladder gives us necessary courage & will power to take a judgment. Before
taking a decision, critical analysis of issues & clear —cut thinking is made possiblethe small
intestine. Heart houses the mind. Sound mind helps in taking sound decisions. Unsound
mind does not help in taking sound decisions. Pericardium provides the needed maturity to
take matured decisions. Liver gives the power of resolution needed to implement the decision
taken.

Small intestineperforms the following functions :

Treatment of Small Intestine Diseases

i) | Separates pure & impure parts from the food;
ii) Separates pure & impure parts from the fluids;
iii) Recognise the right & the wrong.

1) Separating the pure & impure parts from the food :
Small intestine received the digested food from the stomach & then separates the
Clean & Dirty parts. The clean part is sent by the spleen to the whole body for
nourishment. The digestion of food is done with the help of spleen, by the small intestine.
The dirty part of the food is sent to the large intestine for evacuation in the form of stool.
The dirty part of fluids is sent to the urinary bladder for evacuation as urine. Thus, the
small intestine affects the urinary bladder also. So in urinary bladder diseases, treatment
of small intestine should also be done.

2) Separates pure & impure parts from the fluids :
The small intestine separates into pure & impure fluids that come into it with the food.
For this functioning, the Kidney yang provides the necessary energy & heat to the
small intestine. If there is some problem in the function of the small intestine, the quantity
of urine may become either excessive or extremely small. If coldness comes to small

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 211

