Chapter

Functions of Urinary Bladder :

Urinary Bladder Meridian

According to Allopathic System function of Urinary Bladder is to store urine and excrete
itwhich in Chinese Acupuncture function of urinary bladder is considered very wide.

The bladder is like a distric official, it stores the fluid so that they can be excreted by its
action of Qi transformation.
(Chapter 8 of ‘Simple Questions’)

Turbid fluids separated by Small Intestine come into Urinary Bladder. Urinary Bladder
transform them into urine and stores them and excrete Urinary Bladder takes Qi and heat
for transformation of turbid fluid into urine from Kidney Yang. Though Urinary Bladder
transforms turbid fluid into urine but necessary Qi for this it takes from Kidney. When there
is deficiency of Qiin Urinary Bladder there is transparent watery urine in excess quantity
cause of this is that due to deficiency of Qi in urinary bladder turbid part of fluid is not
excreted in such condition treatment shouldbe of Kidney Yang deficiency.

Lower warmer of Tripple Warmer helpin function of urinary bladder. Lower warmer
opens and clears the water passages in lower part of the body. So in any case of obstruction
in opening, closing and automatic function of urine or stool passage in lower part of the
body treatment should be also on lower warmer. Small Intestine and urinary bladder both
together work the function of moving fluid in the lower warmer. So we use Si 2 (Water point
of small intestine) and UB 53 in obstructions of urine. Because Heart and Small intestine
are related to each other so due to theart disease small intestine is affected and urinary
bladder is affected by small intestine. In such condition disease manifests in urinary bladder
but root cause is in Heart. In such condition treatment has to done on Heart meridian.

0 Dreams:
“When the Bladder is deficiency one dreams of voyage.”
(Chapter 43 of Spiritual Axis Relation of Urinary Bladder with Kidney)

A Treatise on
\ Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 219

