Chapter

Functions of Kidney :

A person receives prenatal or preheaven Qi through Kidneys. Essence is stored in
Kidneys which a person obtains during conception.

There are two aspects of Kidney. Kidney Yin and Kidney Yang. Kidney In is also
called primary Yin. Kidney yang is also called primary yang. The base of whole yin Qi of the
body is kidney yin. The base of the whole yang Qi of the body is kidney yang. Yin Qi of
Liveris given by kidney and yang Qi of Spleen is given by Kidney. Heart and Lungs receive
yin Qi from Kidney Yin and Yang Qi from Kidney Yang. Liver does not get Yang Qi from
Kidney and Spleen does not get yin Qi from Kidney.

The basic element of birth, growth and reproduction is kidney yin. Kidney yang gives
necessary inspiration for all physical activities of body. Kidney yin supplies necessary
material to Kidney yang for its work and outer manifestion of Kidney yin is kidney yang.
These both are dependent on each other.

To understand it we can take up an example of a lamp. In this oil represents Kidney yin
and blaze represents Kidney yang. In lamp when oil is reduced then bluze becomes also
dim and when quantity of oil is increased then light is also bright. So prblems of kidney
should be treated on both kidney yin and kindey yang because when one is reduced another
is also reduced and when one is incrased another is also increased.

There is one more condition when inspite of less quantity of oil light increases. In such
condition quantity of oil becomes more less it means there becomes kidney yin deficiency.
There is another condition when in lamp quantity of oil is more than need and light does not
increases but that lessens the light. To tonify kidney yang also tonify kidney yin.

Kidney is trhe regulator of water and heat in body. According to five element theory
kidney is related to water element but in reality kidney is also the soure of fire element also
in the body and on account of this kidney has been call ‘The Five Gate of Vitality”.

Functions of Kidneys in the body are the following :

1) _Tostore essence and control birth, growth, reproduction and development.

2) To produce marrow and fill up the brain and control bones.

3) Regulate water element in the body.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7

Kidney

