8

10.

Yin and Yang are not static :

They are changeable. After summer, winter comes. After life, death comes. After day,

night comes. In the same way, changing yin to yang and yang to yin takes place. This

transformation has two conditions :

a) Intemal condition

b) External condition

a) _ Internal condition of transformation of yin to yang or yang to yin, is primary and

external cause is secondary.
As anegg changes to chick; this happens due to heat. In this, primary condition
is internal and the strength to change to chick. For this transformation, external
heat is required. And this is the secondary condition. If stone is given heat, it
evon't transform into chick.

b) External condition is the time factor; with time, chick will come out of the egg.
With time, day and night happen. With time only, seasons change, with time only,
youth changes to old age. In this, primary factor is extemal condition and secondary
factor is the intemal condition.

Use of Yin and Yang in Treatment:

In Chinese Acupuncture, all the four activities viz., physiology, pathology, diagnosis and

treatment are done on the fundamental principles of yin and yang. Each body activity,

each symptom and indication of disease is analyzed on the basis of yin and yang theory.

After this analysis, treatment is done by any of the following four methods :

| Fourmethods of treatment:

1) By Tonifying Yang

2) By Tonifying Yin

3) Byeliminating excess Yang

4) Byeliminating excess Yin

So it is very important to know how to use yin-yang theory in the treatment.
Body structure and Yin Yang:

Each part of human body is preeminently Yin or Yang. This knowledge helps in the
treatment. A good therapist should also know that Yin and yang are comparative and
not absolute. For example, when chest is compared with stomach, then chest is upper
and so is yang and stomach being lower is yin. But between chest and head, chest is
comparatively yin since it is lower than the head as the latter is upper.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7

