4)
5)
6)
i)
8)

Reption of the Qi for the body.
Kidneys open in ears.

Kidneys manifest in hair.

Kidney controls two lower orifices.
The kidneys house the will power.

1) Tostore essence and control birth, growth, reproduction and development :

Kidn ee
sence wnien 1s called ~~

1 tame: 5077 a immer! preneaven ¢

ssence.

ody, ability and vitality.
irth matures the senses
here becomes infertility,

life as birth, adulthood,
sence. Yellow emperor
/ controls these cycles.
y yin into kidney Qi and

e. If essene in Kidney is
d reprodution power is
becomes infertility and

aS:
Ire and bone marrow in
are formed and which
ord. It means that the
also formed by marrow
and other matters also
ure there is functional

Part 7 23

2)

preheaven or prenatal essence and second is post heaven

First type of essence determines our basic structure of the
First type of essence nourishes the womb, does growth after
and develops reproduction power. Due to lack of this essence
impotency and physical or mental retardness.

Refined essence through food is called post heaven essenc

Both types of essence together controls the different stages
menopause and death. Man becomes old due to lack of the ¢
describes 8 cycles of male and 7 cycles of female life. Kidn
This kidney essence gives us the capability to transform kidr
harvesting of this capability is done by kidney yang.

Status of Kidney in the body is known by the quantity of esse
proper then kidney is strong and vital and sexual power a
proper. If essene is laing or wea then vitality is reduced, ther
sexual power is reduced.

To produce marrow and fill up the brain and control bo!

There is difference between the marrow in Chinese Acupunc
western therapy. Marrow is the substance by which bone
forms the matter inside the bone marrow, brain and spina
substance forming the bones is marrow and bone marrow i
and cerebro spinal fluid which is filled in brain and spinal cor
are formed by the same marrow. So in Chinese Acupuni
relationship Brain and Kidney.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture -

