If Kidney essence is strong it nourishes the brain which improves meory concentration
and sight. According to Chinese Acupuncture idneys are the origin of sill and intelligence.
If Kidney essence is weak brain does not get proper nourishment, there is lack of
concentration, vertigo and thinking process and foresight becomes dull.
Kidney nourishes bone and bone marrow, teeth are also a part of bone, if kidney
essence becomes weak then bones also becomes weak and loose. In children cause
of slow development of bone and pigeon chest is kidney essence deficiency.
“Kidney control the bone marrow. Ifthe kidneys have heat, the spine will not be straight,
the bone will wither, the marrow will decrease.”

(Chapter 44 of the ‘Simple Questions’

3) Kidney controls water element in the body :
According to five element theory kidney regulates water element in the body. Kidney
regulates body fluids in lower warmer of the body by opening and closing the exit door.
If there is balance in kidney yin anhd kidney yang quantity of urine etc. remain proper
and opening and closing function of urine passage remains proper.
In Kidney yang deficiency urine passage opens more and there is excess quantity of
urine. In Kidney yin deficiency urine passage is closed and quantity of urine decreases
and urine becomes dark coloured.
Urinary Bladder recevies necessary Qi from kidney for strong and excretion of urine.
In lower warmer Large Intestine and Small Intestine play important role in
separating turbid and clear fluid. This function of intestine is also done in control of
Kidney yang.
Kidney receives supply of fluid from Lungs. Kidney excrets some part of this fluid out
from the body, some part of the fluid evaporates it self and some part of the fluid
retums back to moisten the Lungs.
Kidney yang gives heat to Spleen through which spleen does the function of
transformation and transportation of the fluids.
4) Reception of Qi for the body :

Lungs receive Qi of air with O, and send this clear Qi downward to Kidney. Lungs
does the function of sending Qi downward and Kidney does the function of retaining
this Qi in lower part. In this way there becomes the balance of Qi in upper and lower

A Treatise on
232 Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7

