6)

part of the body. If Kidney is unable to retain this Qi in lower part then this Qi goes back
to upward by contravection and weak chest congestion resulting in difficult breathing
and asthama. This is one main cause of chronic asthama. Kidney and Lungs both
together balance the Qi in upper and lower part of the body. If Qi increases in upper
part of the body then there may be breathing disease in upper part of the body and in
lower part there may be lumbar and heel pain due to deficiency of Qi.

Kidneys open in to the ears :

“The kidneys open into the ears, if the kidneys are healthy the ears can hear the five
sounds.”

(First Chapter of ‘Spiritual Axis’)
If kidney are weak there becomes deafness and tinnitus.
Kidneys reflects in Hair :

“It the kidneys are strong, the teeth will be firm and the hair will grow well
kidneys are declining in energy the hair will fall out and the teeth become loose.’

(First Chapter of ‘Simple Questions’)
If hairs are becoming thin, white or falling then it means that hair are not receving

proper nourishment from Kidneys. Cause of this may be deficiency of kidney essence.
So in that condition treatment should be on Kidneys.

Kidneys Control Lower two orfices :

In lower two orifices one is in front side and other is in back side. In front door there are
urine passage and spermatic cord or ballopian tube and in back door there is anus.
Kidney controls the both front and back door. Control of urine passage is done by
Urinary Bladder but Urinary Bladder receives necessary Qi for this from Kidney Yang.
If kidney becomes weaks then person becomes unable to control urine. Sperm is the
outer manifestation of the kidney essence. In deficiency of Qi or essence semen
becomes diluted and there is involuntary emission and night fall. Though anus is a part
of large intestine but for function itis dependent upon kidney. For defecation anus gets
help from bile lubricant, excretory pressure of Large Intestine and Kidney helps by
giving necessary Qi for opening and closing the anal sphincter. Anus receives
autonomic Qi from Kidney.

If kidney is weak, controlling power of urine and stool is reduced.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 233

