8) The Kidneys house the will power :
If Kidneys are strong then will power is also firm and brain determines the clear goal
and tries to achieve the goal without any doubt. But if Kidney is weak then will power
lack and the person diverts from the goal.
Right Kidney and Left Kidney are two distinct organs :
i) Left Kidney
ii) Right Kidney
Left Kidney is the main kidney and right kidney is called “Gate of Vitality. The Gate of
Vitality is the residence of mind and this is Original Qi.”
In male this stores the essence and in female this is attached with uterus. So the
person has only one Kidney which is called left Kidney.
In Chinese literature it has been described that there are 6 yin and 5 yang organs.
Why itis called so? Cause of this is that during the counting of yin organs kidney is
counted not as one organ, but itis counted as two organ. Left Kidney is considered as
proper kidney and right kidney is considered as gate of vitality. There are five yin
organs related five yang organs. Sixth and extra yang organ is tripple warmer. Left
Kidney is yin organ and its related yang organ is Urinary Bladder. Right Kidney is gate
of vitality organ and its yang organ is tripple warmer.
In China during Ming time right kidney is not considered as Gate of vitality. It is
considered that there are two Kidneys and gate of vitality exists between two kidneys.
In human body gate of vitality is the sea of essence. it is the mixed organ of water and
fire. In this is the residence of both yin and yang and it decides the life and death. Gate
of vitality is the motive force of the whole functions of the body because it is that heat
which is most necessary for life. It is also called true fire or minister fire. According to
five element theory Heart is related to fire element and water element related is Kidney.
Physical energy works according to five element theory. But in the form of heavely Qi
heat and water which is received as essence is called gate of vitality and residence of
this gate of vitality is in between the both kidneys.

Functions of Gate of Vitality :
1. Gate of Vitality is root of Original Qi:

Kidney is the residence of Original Qi. One and off switch of this original Qi is
located between both Kidneys as plenty of energy can be made by uranium in the

A Treatise on
(284 ) Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 )

