2.

5.

same way plentiful energy can be made by the essence of original Qi through life
long. This Qi help in blood foremation. This Qi gives necessary heat and strong
will for achievement of physical and other goal in life.

Gate of vitality provides fire for all the internal organs :

Lack of heat in gate of vitality reduces the functioning capacity of the whole organs
and the person feels fatigue. There becomes depression and comes negative
thoughts. There becomes deficiency of vitality and the person feels cold. In that
condition right kidney should be toned and treatment should be given on the point
GV 5% special point of “Kautsu” which is related to Gate of vitality and exists
between both Kidneys.

By giving treatment on GV 5% function of Heart, Kidney, Aorta, Peritoneum and
Brain improves. By giving treatment on this point heat radiation of vitality improves
like battery recharge.

Gate of Vitality Warms the Lower Warmer :

With the help of Urinary Bladder, lower warmer excrets fluids from the body.
Gate of vitality gives necessary Qi and heat for this to lowe warmer. if gate of
vitality is weak then there may be deficiency of excretory heat in lower warmer
and humidity may increase or there may be swelling.

Gate of Vitality Warms Stomach & Spleen to help digestion :

For transportation, analysis and transormation of food and drink spleen needs
heat. Spleen receives this heat from Gate of vitality. if gate of vitality is weak
there may be problem of loose motion, fatigue and cold in organs and feeling cold
etc due to deficiency of digestive fire in Spleen.

Gate of vitality regulates Sexual Function :

Gate of vitality is must for healthy sexual relation. It gives fire to essence and
uterus. Sexual activity, reproduction power, adulthood and menses all these are
dependent upon gate of vitality. Due to weakness of gate of vitality there become
impotency in male and infertility and leukorrhoea in female.

Gate of vitality helps Kidneys in Reception of Qi:

Qi is received in body through Kidney. Function of receiving Qi does Kidney
yang. Continuous smooth function of this there must be coordination between

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 ( 235 }

