and middle arm. Lower warmer includes the Liver, Kidney, Large Intestine and Urinary
Bladder and lower arm and lower extremities.

@ Actually Tripple Warmer controls different types of Qi production, storage and distribution
function in upper, middle and lower part of the body. It gives necessary Qi for production
of Qi, storage and distribution and for this function help in secretion of necessary
hormones and also helps in formation, control, distribution and secretion of digestive
fluids on account of this it has been called endocrine meridian. it also controls the
temperature of upper, middle and lower part of the body and that's why it has been
called Tripple Warmer. Tripple Warmer does the function of conformation of brain orders
for implementation of function s of organs of upper, middle and lower part of the body.
In organ clock time of Tripple Warmer is 9 PM to 11 PM.

@ Till 9 PM to 9:40 PM Qi exists in upper warmer, till 9:40 PM to 10:10 PM in middle
warmer and till 10:10 PM to 11 PM in lower warmer.

@ When there become urticaria etc. allergic skin diseases in the body. Ithas been seen
that they aggravate in upper part of the body till 9 PM to 9:40 PM more. After that it
remains in middle part of the body till 9:40 to 10:10 PM and till 10:10 PM to 11 PMin
lower part of the body. Allergy of body is also treated on Tripple Warmer meridian.

Tripple Warmer ensures that :
a) Allthe passages in the human body are open.
b) The various types of Qi flows smoothly
c) They wastes are excreted properly.
@ Each of the three warmer is incharge of particular function and particular movement
of Qi:
a) The upper warmeris incharge of dispersing and scattering the Qi to the skin and

muscles of the whole body. This work is done through Lungs and Heart. Tripple
Warmer controls the outward movement of defensive Qi to the skin.

b) The middle warmer is incharge of digesting food, transforming it and transporting
the food Qi upwards to the Lungs and the Heart. This work of the digestion,
transformation and transportation done by the Stomach and Spleen. The tripple
warmer controls the movement of nutritive Qi. it ensures that the nutritive Qi
moves in the right directions.

Itensures that the Spleen Qi goes upwards and the Stomach Qi goes downwards.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 ( 259 }

