2)

Liver blood storage also affects the menses. If liver stores blood properly then menses
becomes regular. If there is a deficiency of blood in the liver then there will be
Amenorrhea or Oligomenorrhea, however if there is a excess of blood in the liver or if
the blood is warm, then there would be Menorrhea or Metorrhagia .

When there is Liver Qi stagnation, storage blood in Liver is upset and during
menstruation there is excessive pain and in the menstrual fluid there would black
clots.

If there is a Liver blood deficiency then it would result in blurred vision, spasm in
muscles and shrinking of tendons.

Eczema and psoriasis deterioration in the quality of blood due to malfunctioning of liver
for example, food is spoilt by keeping in a dirty utensil, in the same way due to
malfunctioning liver, the stored blood becomes infected and skin diseases take place.
Liver decides the flow and direction of Qi:

Liver decides the proper flow of Qi in the entire body, in all the organs and in all the
directions. The Qi of organs has a definite direction. Qi of some organs flows downwards
e.g., Lungs and stomach Qi flow from up to downwards. Qi of other organs flows
upwards. For example, spleen Qi flows from down to upwards.

The normal flow of liver Qi is upwards and outwards in all directions so that the flow of
Qican spread in all directions in the body.

In the body, by the liver, the flow of Qi all around has these types of effects :

a) Effects of emotions of the persons

b) Effects on digestion

c) Effects on the secretions of bile

a) Effects onemotions :

When the flow of Qi in the body is normal, then the emotions of the person are
balanced and he is contented. However, when the flow is obstructed, then
simultaneously with frustration, depression and depressed onset, there is pain or
heaviness in chest and pelvis, tension legs, lumps in throat etc appear in the
body .In females there is premenstrual syndrome, depression, irritation and
heaviness in the chest.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7

