4)

5)

6)

Liver opens in the eyes :

Eye is that sense organ which is related to the liver. Liver blood provides nourishment
and moisture to the eyes which enables it the power to see. When liver blood is adequate
then the eyesight is proper. When liver blood is deficient, then ailments of blurred
vision, insect in front of eyes, myopia, colour blindness etc happens and eyes look
dry.

Treatment of dry eyes should be liver deficiency. When heat excess in liver, eye
becomes blood red, they have pain and burning. When liver has internal wind, eye's
pupil moves up and the disease of nystagmus (autonomic movement of pupil) occurs.
Heart and kidney is also related to the eyes. Due to excess of heart fire also, eyes
becomes red and painful. Due to deficiency of kidney yin, the power of eyes to see
redness and dryness of eyes increases.

The Liver Manifests in the Nails :

Liver controls the sinuses and its flourishing condition manifests on the nails.
(Chapter 10 of the “Simple Question")

Ifliver blood is adequate, and then nails are healthy but if liver blood is deficient, then

nourishment of nails reduces and nails start becoming black, indented and brittle.

Liver houses the ethereal soul :

In china, soul is considered as two types :

i) Corporal soul

i) Ethereal soul-called Hun in china.

In ancient the sky; some are good soul and some are bad soul and that, these souls
are the main cause of ailments. After these concepts, therapists’ views or treatment
changed and they started considering weather and natural seasons as the cause of
disease of human body.

Ethereal soul is yang by nature and goes up in sky after death. Corporeal soul comes
with the body and gets into and the body after death. Ethereal soul is housed in the
liver. Ethereal soul is helpful to us and helps in planning and giving directions to life.
When the ethereal soul starts roaming in the sky, the person’s life becomes unplanned
and aimless. It is now necessary to understand why it extra from the body and start

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 275

