roaming in the sky. When liver blood is adequate, then ethereal soul remain steadfast
strongly in the liver and assists in a planned and purposeful living. However, liver
blood becomes deficient, then the root of ethereal soul becomes weak and the life
becomes aimless. When liver blood or liver yin is weak, then sometimes ethereal soul
leaves the body temporarily, just before sleep. When liver yin becomes extremely
deficient, then the person just before sleeping feels he is flying. This happens when
the ethereal soul's root becomes weak.
“Mfliver blood is deficient, firer agitates the ethereal soul resulting in noctumal emission
with dream.”
(Discussions on “Blood Diseases")

0 Dreams:
When Qiis excessive in liver, then the person dreams of anger. When there is deficiency
of Qi in the liver, then the person dream of mushrooms; and if these dreams are in
spring season, then it would appear that he is lying under the tree but unable to get up.
When liver is deficient, then the person dreams of forests on the mountains.

C1 __Liveris the organ of will power:
When there is stagnation of liver Qi and Qi to excessive and liver yang flows upwards
then the person becomes angry; and when this liver Qi is healthy then the person gets
will power for creativity.
Liver effects mental and physical function of higher achievement and progress.
For example, a small plant, with nourishment and with time grows into a tree, into a
some way if liver Qi is healthy and its upward and all direction flow is automatic, then
the person adequate flows physically and mentally but when liver yang or liver fire
rises excessively, then yin and yang separate and person gets fits of anger, face
becomes red, tinnitus, headache, dizziness etc ailments occur.

© Windy weather affects the Liver:
Whenever there is strong wind in the weather, liver is affected. This proves that the
liver is related not only to the liver wind but also to the external wind. It has been
observed that during strong wind times, patients of liver ailments complain of headache,
neck stiffness etc; the main cause of this external wind.

A Treatise on
276 Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 )

