15.

5)
6)
8)
9)

10)

11

12)
13)

14)

15)
16)

17)

Any lumps, swelling or masses that are hard are usually due to excess of yang.
Any lumps, swelling or masses that are soft are usually due to excess of yin.
Whenever there is any hyperactivity any where in the body. It indicates excess
of yang. For example a rapid heart rate may indicate excess of yang of heart.
Whenever there is any hopoactivity any where in the body, it indicates excess of
yin. Slow heart beat may indicate excess of yin of the heart.

\fa person's movements are rapid and he walks and talks fast, it may indicate an
excess of yang.

Ifa person's movements are slow and he walks and talks slow it may indicate an
excess of yin.

If the symptoms appear suddenly and change rapidly, they indicate a yang
condition.

Ifthe symptoms appear gradually and change slowly they indicate a yin condition.
If yang is normal, the things will be kept moving, Qi will flow normally and fluids
will be transformed and excreated normally.

Ityangis deficient, Qi stagnates, fluids are not transformed or excreted. Therefore,
yin will prevail.

Thus yang keeps things moving and in a state of fluidity or non substantality.
When yin prevails, the movement and transformation power of yang fails. The
energy condenses into form and it becomes substantial.

For example, when yang Qi moves properly in stomach, then intestines also
properly function. Food is digested properly intestines absorb the nutritive part
properly and excrete waste products — stool and urine properly. If yang energy is
depleted or is not functioning properly. Then digestion and excretion part is
obstructed. Circulation of body fluids in blood reduces and first, obstruction in
blood happens and finally nodes are formed in the body.

The Interdependance of Yin & Yang:

(i)

(i)
(ii
(iv)

The Yin & Yang organs are very different in their functions.
But they depend on each other for the performance of their functions.
The Yin organs depend on the Yang organs to produce Qi and blood from food.

The Yang organs depend on the Yin organs for nourishment deriving from blood
& essence stored in Yin organs.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 ( 29 )

