© Diagnosis
In Chinese Acupuncture, treatment of ailments is done by balancing the organs
functioning capability after seeing the external symptoms signs and diseases. Chinese
diagnosis is entirely different from the western diagnosis methods. Ifa person suffers from
lack of decision making ability, then in Chinese Acupuncture, itis called deficiency of Gall
Bladder; and so by removing Gall Bladder's deficiency, the person's ability to take decisions
increases marvelously. Again, if a person feels very thirstily then his body has hot condition
but if he does not feel thirsty, then his body has cold condition. By balancing both these
conditions, thirst gets balanced.
0 Causes of Disease
In Chinese Acupuncture, balance in the body is the key of good health. Balance in rest
and work, balance in the food, balance in the sexual activity, balance in emotions, balance
in the weather etc. bring about balance in the body. Imbalance for a prolonged period in
these becomes a cause of disease. Excessive work or rest, excessive sex, imbalanced
food, imbalanced emotions, unfavorable effect of weather etc. become the cause of a disease.
For finding the cause of these imbalances, first one will have to think on the following
three phase of life :
1) Prenatal period;
2) Childhood period (birth to 18 years)
3) Adult life (18 years till death)
1) Prenatal Period :
Atthe time of conception, the health of the parents specially affects the new born. If at
that time, the parents are old, then the child born will be structurally/ physically weak.
If the mother is sick or weak, then the child will also be weak. Excess medication
during pregnancy also affects the child.
If during pregnancy, the mother gets some shock, then the fetus is also effected and
when that child is born, blue luster on its forehead and chin may be visible. If at
conception, the mother is weak, then the child born will be weak too. If the pregnant
mother is suffering from some disease, then the infant would be effected too with that
ailment. If the father is a chain smoker, then the child’s right lung may be effected; ifthe
mother had suffered from T. B. of the lungs, then the child's left lung may be effected.
The impact of ailments of parents before conception, on their new born child, will be
how much, has been a topic of continuous research in Chinese Acupuncture.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7

