16.

“Yin is the structure of the organ and yang is the blood stored in it

1) Wthout structure (Yin) the function (Yang) can not be performed.

2) Without function (Yang) the structure (Yin) will lack transformation & movement.
Yin is interior and the material foundation of Yang.

Yang is exterior and is the manifestation of Yin.”
(Chapter 5 of simple Question)

The mutual consuming of Yin & Yang:

Yin & Yang are in a constant state of change. When Yin increases the Yang is

consumed, when Yang increases, the Yin is consumed.

This happens to ensure balance. This may be observed in the changes that take

place during day and night. When day ends, yang reduces and yin increases. Similar

may be observed when weather changes. When spring comes, yin starts reducing
and yang increases. This is to ensure harmony in one's reducing and other's increasing.

Mutual Consumption of Yin and Yang :

i) IfYinis consumed, Yang increases

ii) If Yangis consumed, Yin increases.

ii) If Yinincreases, Yang is consumed.

iv) IfYang increases, Yin is consumed.

During summers, when heat (yang) increases, then in our body sweat (yin) increases.

In this way, yin is consumed. When external atmosphere is very cold (yin), body

shivers so that yang (heat) is generated.

When infection enters the body and disease attacks, then fever (excess yang) comes.

This fever dries body fluids (consumption of yin) and dryness increases.

Itis important to understand that excess of yang and consumption of yang are

two different things :

i) In excess of yang, the primary factor is abnormal increase of yang. The abnormal
increase of yang leads to consumption of yin. This is called full heat pattern. In
this case, yang is sedated.

ii) Inconsumption ofyin, the primary factor is deficiency of yin. This abnormal deficiency
of yin leads to apparent excess of yang. This is called empty heat pattern. In this
case, yin is to be toned. This is explained in the seven sketches below.

A Treatise on
30 Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7

