3)

4)

Controlling the Activities of Downward Flow and Dispersing of Qi
The function of lungs is to send the defensive qi and body fluids downwards and to
disperse it all round between thin and muscles and spray it uniformly. This causes the
defensive qi to uniformaly spread in the body and protect it and provides wetness to
the skin. When a person catches cold, then it cause is deficiency of lungs. When
Lungs qi becomes deficient, skin pores open wides and the person continuously sweats.
However when lungs qiis in excess, skin pores close and sweating stop. This happens
in case of attack of external wind cold.

Flowing downwards lungs Qi meets kidney .If lungs Qi does not flow downwards, It
stagnates in the chest and patient feels heaviness in the chest, gets breathlessness
and cough . In such a situation, treatment should be done tomake the lungs Qi to flow
downwards. Lungs send Qi is not able to reach the small intestine, then in such a
case, the patient ability to pass stool reduces (specially of old people) and they suffer
from constipation. when lungs Qi stagnates and unable to reach the urinary bladder
then old people’s urine stops. Therapist should have detected accurate knowledge of
these lungs functions for precise treatment.

Protecting Body from External Environment:

Lungs functions as the bridge and link between the human body and external
environment. So in attack of external environment and weather on the body treatment
should be of Lungs. As in cold, sunstroke etc. treatment is given on Lungs. At first
Lungs are affected by external environment. Lungs are affected by extemal environment
in two ways :

i) Attack of external wind cold

ii) Attack of external wind heat

Regulate the Water Passages :

“Fluids enter the Stomach, the refined partis transmitted upward to the Spleen. Stomach
Qi, in turn, spreads it upwards to the Lungs, who regulating the water passages, sends

tiit down to the Bidder.”
(Chapter 21 of the ‘Simple Questions’)

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 291

