6)

8)

9)

Fluids refineded by Spleen come into Lungs. Lungs make this refined fluid more thin
and refined and spray this refined fluid unifarmily under the skin of the whole body.
This refined fluid gives moistening to the skin and regulates the skin pores. As per
need pores open and close. Fluid is exceted out from body in teh form of sweating
from skin pores.

Lungs control this whole process. Due to disturbance in this process there becomes
edema by collecting fluid under the skin. In area of edema there is pitting by pressure.
In this type of edema treatment should be of Lungs.

Nourishing the Skin and Hairs :

Lungs receive fluids from Spleen and spread it by making rarest under skin of the
body. Due to this skin and hairs of the body go moistening and nourishment. if lungs
are weak then skin and hair become dry and unnourished.

Providing Power of Smelling :

If Lungs Qiis strong then nose is opened and breathing remains smooth and sense of
‘smell works normally. if there becomes external attack on Lungs then nose is closed.
There is sneezing, smeel power reduces. There starts epistaxis in attack of external
heat on Lungs.

Controlling the Meridians and Blood Channels :

Heart controls the blood vessels. Lungs control the flow of Qi in the meridians and
also control the flow of blood in the blood vessels. Since, the Lungs govern Qi and Qi
is needed for all types of circulations in the body including circulation of blood, body
fluids and Qi in various types of vessels in the human body. Hence, the Lungs control
the circulation of Qi and blood to the extremities and keeps them warm.

In Chinese Acupuncture it is a proverb that the Lungs govern the 100 vessels in the
body.

Housing the Carporeal Qi:

A person has the feeling of pain, itching etc. by corporeal soul. Lung houses the
corporeal soul., sadness, grief, anxiety, bereavement etc. cause obstruction in
movement of corporeal soul. person's breathing is effected by this. By strengthening
the corporeal soul sadness etc. emotion is cured. To give power to corporeal soul give
treatment on Lu 7, 9, UB 37.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 )

