“If Stomach Qi is strong, the five yin organs are healthy, if the stomach is weak, they
will decline.”

“The Doctor who wants to nourish life, has to tonify Stomach and Spleen.”

(Yu dia Yan (1585-664)

“The Five yin organs all derive Qi from the Stomach and thus the Stomach is the root
of five yin organs.”

(Classics of Difficulties)

When Stomach becomes unable to form Qi and becomes deficient then a person feels
weakness and fatigue. So during the treatment of constant fatigue there should be alternation
on Stomach treatment.

One important thing is to notice that stomach needs liquid to send food downward in
digestive tract from upward. Due to lack of this liquid Stomach working as mixure becomes
tired and finally becomes Stomach yin deficiency. So proper water etc. liquid should be
taken stomach needs humidity and Spleen needs dryness.

Due to excessive humidity Spleen does not bring Qi and body fluids to centre from
downward. For this function Spleen needs dryness. Due to increase of humidity in Spleen
or in pathway of spleen there becomes spleen yang deficiency and there becomes swelling
and heavienss in lower part of the body in Spleen meridian pathway.

Remeber that stomach is the source of all body fluids in the body because all the
things which we eat or drink body fluids are formed by that. If there becomes body fluids
related disease in body then cause of that may be stomach yin deficiency.
© Food:

The root cause of the Stomach diseases are the food. it is necessary to know -

How much quantity of food should be eating when to eat? What to eat and what not to

eat?
© What to Eat? What do not Eat? :

1) Dry food is harmful for Stomach, roasted gram, muthry, bhuzia, bread, dry fuits
etc. are harmful for Stomach. By this there becomes lack of humidity in Stomach
and Stomach becomes dry and there becomes Stomach Yin Deficiency.

2) Stomach heat may increase due to excessive use of hot type food. As eating
chillies, spices, ginger, tea, coffee, tobacco etc. increases Stomach heat.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 313

