1)
2)
3)

4)

5)

8)

8)

9)

Stomach is yang organ and Spleen is yin organ.
Stomach and Spleen both are related with Earth Element in body.

Stomach Qi descends from upward in body and Spleen Qi ascends downward.
In this way they complete a cycle of energy in body.

Inspite of being a yang organ Stoach likes humidity and dislikes dryness. Inspite
of being a yin organ Spleen likes dryness and dislikes humidity. Humidity increases
the digestion power of Stomach and dryness increases the ascending power of
Spleen Qi.

If Stomach is dry then its downward flow is obstructed and food does not go
towards Small Intestine. This is called retention of food and Qi in Stomach.

If there is excess humidity in Spleen then Spleen Qi does no ascend and
ascending of Qi and body fluids also becomes obstructed.

Diseases in Stomach mostly occur by increase of energy. Diseases in Spleen
mostly occur by decrease of energy.

Stomach is prone to heat. Stomach heats up soon. Spleenis prone to cold. Spleen
becomes cold soon. Excess heat does not suit Spleen.

In Stomach there becomes oftenly Stomach Yin deficiency. In Spleen there
becomes Spleen yang deficiency oftenly.

Therapists should notice that by nature yang ascends and yin descends. All yin
and yang meridians of hand function following this rule. But Stomach, Gall Bladder
and Urinary Bladder meridians of leg inspite of being yang descends and Spleen,
Liver and Kidney meridian inspite of being yin ascend. It means that the Stomach
inspite of being yang works like yin. Spleen inspite of being yin meridian works
like yang. This is the reason that Stomach Point No. 1 to Point No. 31 are in yin
side. In the same way Spleen Point No. 1 to 5 are in yang side.

Therapists must remeber following thumb rules :

Treat CV 12 in Stomach distention and pain an account of deficiency in Stomach and
when due to excess energy in Stomach when there occur nausea and vomiting etc.
by contravection give treatment on St 21.

The Stomach meridian is a yang channel with 45 points.
Stomach Meridian (Yang Ming).

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7

