@ Qikeeps changing its form. When it flows as vapour or energy, then its flow is
moderate/slow but in dense form or in matter form, its flow stops. Therapists
should know that :

i) Body fluids are semi rare or semi dense or liquid form of Qi with flowing
water, electricity is produced,

i) Matters are dense form of Qi, like coal is matter and by burning it Qi is
produced which appears as Heat. Coal produces electricity.

ii) Gases, vapours etc are rare forms of Qi. Flowing wind also produces
electricity.

iv) Rarest form of Qiis electricity, Bio-energy etc. Ultimately there is only
Qi in various forms.

e = Inthe world, Qiis found in millions of forms. Qi from heaven is in rare and is pure.
Qi of the world is semi rare and dense andis polluted.

@ Human body also operates by Qi. In different parts of the body, this Qi has different
functions. So it is given different name based on its function. For example, Qi in
the internal parts of the body, is called nutritive Qi, in the external parts, itis called
defensive Qi and this protects the body from external attacks. When there is
some problem in the nutritive Qi, then the ailments appear with different symptoms
and then specific treatment of nutritive Qi is done. If there is some problem in the
defensive Qi, then different symptoms appear and therefore defensive Qi’s specific
treatment is done.

e — Ifnodes, boils, stagnation etc happen in the body, it world indicate that due to
reduction of Qi's flow, densification has started by increasing the flow of Qi, nodes
can be cured and dense Qi that has stagnated in the odes shall start flowing
again in the body.

e@ Inthe body, Qi has two facets : in the first, life has purified life essence which is
produced by body's internal organs. This essence nourishes body and brain.
This life essence is also found in various parts of the body in different forms and
performs different functions. In the chest, it is in the form of gathering Qi and
nourishes heart and lungs. This, as an original Qi in the body's lower warmer, it
nourishes kidneys and organs below the navel.

e Inthe second facet, Qi si in the form of functional Qi which corrects the functions
of body’s internal organs. This Qi is not as pure as life essence but directs the
related organ’s functioning. For example, Heart Qi, Liver Qi, Lungs Qi, Kidney Qi
and Stomach Qietc.

A Treatise on >)
(48) Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7

