ii)

iv)

Lungs Qi flows downwards and liver Qi flows upwards and so lungs and liver
balance each other.

{fthere is some obstruction in Liver Qi, then this is unable to flow in all directions
or Liver Qi's flows upwards increases more than normal this produces several
ailments like migraine, headache and function of spleen and stomach gets affected.

0 Spleen:

i)
il)

ii)

iv)

Pure Qi sent upwards to Lungs and Heart by the Spleen.

Spleen controls the transformation of food. If the transformation of food and
digestion is not proper, then the therapists attention should go to spleen.

If Spleen Qi temporarily starts flowing downwards instead of going upwards, then
diarrhea takes place.

If spleen Qi sinks and its flow upwards becomes very minimal, then the person
will have varicose veins, piles, hernia etc.

0 Heart:

i)
il)

ii)

Heart heat flows downwards where it meets kidney coldness. In the same way,
kidney coldness flows upwards and meets Heart heat.

Actually, heart supplies heat to the body. This heat is sent through blood up to the
kidneys. Kidneys provide coldness to the body. This function is performed by
kidneys by increasing water element in the body. Therefore, to ensure harmony
between heat and coldness in the body so that its temperature is maintained at
98.4°F, Heart and Kidneys together perform this function.

Any obstruction in the above functioning of Heart and Kidney, results in diseases.
These diseases can be cured by treatment. Detailed explanation on these is
given n the following chapters on Heart types of diseases and kidney types of
disease.

0 Stomach:

i)

il)

i

The function of stomach is to receive food. If any obstruction comes in this process,
then therapists should first via stomach. Stomach controls the process of food
going via the mouth through the oesophagus. If there is any problem in the
oesophagus, treatment should be of stomach.

Stomach sends impure Qi downwards where pure Qi is sent by spleen upwards.

Ifthe Qi of stomach starts flowing upwards, then vomiting, nausea and burping starts.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 )

