5. Defensive Qi or Wei Qi:

This Qi flows in the body's outer layer, below the skin. This Qi protects the body
from the attack of external Cold, Heat, Wind etc. This provides warmth nutrition
and humidity to the skin. It also opens and closes the skin pores. Also, it controls
the body temperature by increasing or reducing the sweat. Lungs control defensive
Qi. Itlungs are weak, then defensive Qiis also weak. In this situation, the person
suffers from cold/heat after attack of cold wind or heat wind.

When defensive Qi reduces in the body, then there is continuous sweating during
the day.

Defensive Qi is yang and so resides in the outer part of the body. Kidney yang
produces defensive Qi and so Lungs Qi and Kidney yang together resists external
attack. Defensive Qi receives nutrition from Spleen and Stomach.

When defensive Qi reduces in the body, then the person catches cold frequently.
He continues to fee cold.

Therapists should know the following :

i)
i)

ii)
iv)
v)
vi)

vii)
viii)

ix)

Spleen produces food Qi from food and fluids;

From this food Qi, lungs make two types of Qi - One is defined and the other is
coarse. The first is called nutritive Qi and the other is called Defensive Qi.
Nutritive Qi goes into meridians and blood vessels.

Defensive Qi goes beyond the borders of meridians and into the middle of skin
and flesh. This is because defensive Qi is coarse and so is unable to go into the
meridians.

Nutritive Qi is internal parts of the body and nourishes the body.

Defensive Qiis in extemal areas of body and it protects the body. This Qi protects
the body from Wind, Cold, Heat, Humidity etc.

Defensive Qi controls sweat and temperature of the body.

Ifa person gets extra heat or cold and body temperature increases or reduces,
then treatment of defensive Qi should be done.

In an external attack on outer parts of the body, treatment should be of Lungs Qi.
For example, in on attack of cold-wind cold in lungs should be treated and in case
of cold/cough (pegkedece), wind heat in lungs should be treated.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 ( St )

