Chapter

(@)

Diagnosis

In Chinese Acupuncture, by seeing the signs, marks/spots diseases of the exterior of
the body, the working capacity and disease of on internal organ is assessed. A small boil at
the exterior indicates as to which internal organ and where has got ailment and to what
extent it has spread? With the experience of thousands of years, the Chinese Acupuncturists
have established a clear, special and effective technique for diagnosis of diseases which is
unique initself.

In China, it is said “inspect the exterior to examine the interior’. In China itis accepted
that an intemal disease given indication on the exterior of the body. Observing understanding
the indications and by treating the internal organs, disease of the internal organs in cured
and the external symptoms and indication also disappear.

For example, lack of thirst indicates that inside the body is a cold situation and by
reducing the internal cold, the person starts feeling thirsty. A lack of decision taking ability
indicates deficiency of Qi in Gall Bladder. If a person does not wait to talk, it should indicate
that internally his spleen is deficient in Qi. If after urination, there is pain in the penis, then
this is due to deficiency in urinary bladder; this pain will disappear by toning urinary bladder.
If after defecation, there is pain or spasm in the anus, then this is due to deficiency of Qiin
large intestine and this pain disappears by toning large intestine. If before defection, there is
pain around anus, then this is due to excessiveness in large intestine and by sedating large
intestine, that pain will disappear. Similarly, by observing and understanding the external
symptoms and their relationship with the internal organ, all the type of diseases can be
effectively treated by Chinese Acupuncture.

Skin, color, bones, passage of disease location of pain, type of pain, location of
numbness, route of numbness, location of spasm, route of spasm, smell, stool, urine, sweat,
voice, mental situation, emotions, tongue, likes/dislikes, pulse, size and built, excitement or
depression, appetite, thirst etc. are forms of indications which tell us the internal diseases.

By seeing one part of the body, art of knowing the disease in the entire body, was
developed in China. By feeling the pulse and seeing the face and tongue etc, ailments in the
interior of the body are diagnosed. Any oedema in a specific location of the body, tells the
whole condition of the body. So, in China, itis said that the piece of cloth feels the story of
the while bundle. (a part reflects the whole).

A Treatise on 2)
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 7 (88

