5.

Reactive depression (Hfafmaret@ 31aela) : This depression is due to some
intensily sad external situation, and is relieved, when that situation is removed.
This is also called situational depression?

Melancholic Depression (fasta sift 314a1@) :

This is caused by depressed and unhappy emotional state with abnormal

inhibition of mental and bodily activity. Melancholic depression may be of two types.

a) Agitated melancholic depression (34 BA aren fasrasifra saa) : It is
a form with constant motion and signs of great emotional excitement.

b) —_Involutional melancholic depression (wera ate fasta sifia aera) :

Itis an affective disorder occurring in late middle life, with agitation, worry,
anxiety, somatic preoccupations insomnia and sometimes paranoid

reactions. (aeearafa wife fisare)

Manic Depression (J-t0dI 31ae1a) : Manic depression is alternating between
attacks of mania and depression. It is bipolar disorder. feet feet ar act Tar q
mania Ud POT vat A depression et sie S| SMM Haaasita sey eae
ftir araraear ud ara seat Trax Br ert Sl) GAT ST Aa OR wae SeTeT HATE
Usat @1 Mania or Wei fear Sr ancrecet GX Aaa & eM Depression aw Wit
sara & fea Tat WHR Mania ar Wt MAAR BI Va Depression ar Wit faax
Bl SHER EX WHA al

Senile psycotic depression (GgIaeM BT 3taeTe) : It is senile dementia (Tei wT
312) with depressive or paranoid (ee sift) delusions (fea) or hallucina-
tions (ae4)|

Hallucination (ae) means a false perception or image about sight, sound, smell,
taste or touch.

Unipolar Depressions : In impolar depression there is attack of depression only.
There is never any attack of mania.

Apart from the abovementioned types of depression, there may be seasonal
depression, premenstual depression, post partum depression, prenatal depres-
sion and tempory depression.

Bart ot Ben 8 wf. A. S., PC. S. snfe dt wfcehfienatt F aod & saa S aga
a ORT at ora M1 aay sferainit vw ego Tet aa @ fo 4 IAS or PCS ER & @ cer
ag OE tet dor oe A et sage Ge F ce sada Depression &

for & amd é1

