Functions of extra ordinary vessels :

O The four yin vessels treat mainly organ deeper, more yin and chronic problems.
The four yang vessels treat mainly non-organ, superficial, yang & acute problems.

faq ae structure uA

Or Are function BT

yin vessel mtfras 1 Gut

yang vessel, acute =
O Dr. Manaka and Mr. Ito have proved clinically that treatment of extra ordinary

vessels Is able to correct structural Imbalances, deformities, and extra ordinary

shapes of the body.

An unusually shaped or deformed body, someone hunched over (@@S1), sloping to one
side or handicapped by a physical deformity, can be cured by a treatment of extra ordinary
vessels.

The extra ordinary vessels also correct structural problems such as tension, right-left
imbalance, length differences, or postural quirks (GI 4a1q). The extra ordinary vessels
correct the imbalances of neck, lower back & knees. The patients physical bearing adjusts
as these treatments relieve structural stress.

Yin vessel & yang vessel

art freee gured

wre, agai

irreversible disease

O The other main function of the extra ordinary vessels Is to act as link between
the pre-heaven and post-heaven Qi.

The pre-heaven Qi is the Qi received by the embryo and fetus during pregnancy. The
pre-heaven Qi determines each person's basic constitutional make up, strength, vitality &
wisdom. This pre-heaven Qi makes each individual unique & different from the others. The
post heaven Qi is derived from food & fluids by the stomach & spleen after birth.

After birth one starts eating, drinking and breathing. Its lungs, stomach & spleen start
producing Qi from food & drinks. This is called nutritive Qi. The pre-heaven Qi stored in the
kidneys in the form of essence.

All eight extra ordinary vessels derive their energy & nourishment from the kidneys. All
eight extra ordinary vessels contain the essence, which is stored in the kidneys. The extra
ordinary vessels circulate the essence around the body. Thus these vessels act as liason

(e) A rata m
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 6

