Treatment on eight extra ordinary vessels :
The treatrnent can be given by any of the following methods:

i. In case of ordinary diseases, a simple treatment singly on the master point, by
applying methi seed, or star magnet or needle for 40 minutes to 4 hours may
be sufficient. Treatment by needling should be for a maximum period if 40 minutes.

ii. In case of more chronic or more acute diseases, treat both master point &
coupled point on the affected side, by applying methi seed, or star magnet or
needle for 40 minutes only

In case of musculostructural & constitutional problems treat as follows.

1 Treatment on governing vessel should be given as under :

For Women : Si 3 (Right), UB 62 (Left), Lu7 (Left), K6 (Right), Gv 3 (Left & Right)
afgensil 4 Governing Vessel & STA a We Conception Vessel
or hora far orn 81

8 order 4 points cry ae reverse order 4 points Bera |

ForMen:  Si3(L), UB62(R), Gv3(L&R), K3(L&R), UB23(L&R),
get order 4 points amt Gell reverse order 4 points Scr |

a) Treatment by needles :
Insert needle on master point first & then on the coupled point. Keep the
needle inserted for a period of 40 minutes and then first withdraw the needle
of the coupled point and then withdraw the needle of the master point.

b) Treatment by byol magnets :
Apply north pole of byol magnet on the master point first & then apply south pole of
byol magnet on the coupled point. Keep these magnets for a period of 40 minutes
to 4 hours, as per the requirement of the patient and first withdraw the magnet
from the coupled point and then withdraw the magnet from the master point.

c) Treatment by star magnets or seeds :
Apply star magnet or seed on the master point first & then apply star magnet
or seed on the coupled point. Keep the magnets or seeds for a period of
40 minutes to 4 hours, as per the requirement of the patient. First withdraw the
magnet or seed from the coupled point and then withdraw the magnet or seed
from the master point.

46 A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 6

