24 | TCM protocols for treatment of kidney disease

Functions of Kidneys :

Aperson gets Prenatal or Preheaven Qi through the medium of kidneys. Kidneys
store life essence which he obtains from his parents at the time of conception.

The foundation for the whole body's entire yin Qi is kidney yin; & the foundation
for the whole body's yang Qi is kidney yang. Liver’s yin Qi meets kidney yin Qi and
spleens yang Qi meets kidney yang’s Qi. Heart and Lung's yin Qi gets from kidney yin
& yang Qi gets from kidney yang. Liver’s yang Qi does not get from kidney yang and
spleen’s yin Qi does not get from kidney.

Birth, growth and reproduction’s basic element is kidney yin and for executing all
the physical activities of the body the necessary direction is provided by kidney yang.
The necessary material for kidney yang to function is provided by kidney yin; the external
face of kidney yin is kidney yang. They both are totally interdependant.

To appropriate this, we may take the example of a lamp; in this, the oil represents
kidney yin and the flame represents kidney yang. When the oil quantity reduces in the
lamp, the flame also reduces; when oil increases, the flame also increases. Hence
treatment of all kidney ailments should be done on both kidney yin & kidney yang
because when one reduces the other also reduces but when one increases, the other
also increases.

In other situation arises; when flame increases despite reduction in oil, then the
oil quantity further reduces that is, there is deficiency of kidney yin. In the other case,
when oil increase’s more than necessary but flame does not increase & it dims the
flame.

For tonifying kidney yang. Kidney yin should also be tonified.

Kidney is the founder of water & Heat in the body. According to the five element
theory. Kidney is related to the water element but actually kidney is the source of the
fire element also; hence kidney is called ‘Life's firegate’.

Kidneys perform the following functions in the body :

(i) to store life essence and controls birth, growth, reproduction and

development;

66 A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 13 - English

