TCM protocols for treatment of kidney disease

(ii) to produce bone marrow, fill up the brain and control bones;
(iii) to regulate water element in the body;

(iv) to receive Qi for the body;

(v) Kidneys open into the ears;

(vi) Kidneys manifest in hairs;

(vii) Control of the two lowest gates of the body in kidneys;

(viii) Kidneys house the will power.

(i) Kidneys store essence & controls birth, growth, reproduction &
development :

Kidneys store to types of life essence — first prenatal essence which is called
preheaven essence and the other essence obtained during life time which is called
post heaven or post natal essence.

The first type of life essence decides body's basic structure capability and lividity.
Factus’s, growth after birth, organ related growth, reproduction strength and development
work — all these are done by the first type of life essence. The deficiency in this essence
results in infertility, impotence, body, mental weakness.

The second type of life essence i.e. post heaven essence purification a
transformation food.

Together, both the types of essence contro! various stages of birth, adulthood,
menopause and death. A reduction in this essence results in old age. In yellow emperor,
males 8 life cycles and female’s 7. These cycles are controlled by kidney. This kidney
essence gives us ability to convert the kidney yin into kidney Qi and this ability is utilised
by kidney yang.

The status in the body of kidney is assessed by the quantity of essence. If the
essence in the body is normal then the kidney is strong and livid. Sexual ability and
reproduction capacity is normal. But if the life essence is deficient or weak, then lividity
reduces, infertility comes and sexual ability weakness.

(ii) To Produce marrow and fill up the Brain & Control bones :

In chinese acupuncture,. there is difference between marrow and the western
medicine’s Bone marrow. Marrow is that product by which bones are produced and

Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 13 - English

