TCM protocols for treatment of kidney disease
—

which produces the bone marrow and the product present in brain & spine. This means
that the product which produces the bones is marrow and that Bone marrow is also
produceed by marrow; also that cerebro spinal fluid and other products present in
Brain & Spinal Cord are also produced by this marrow. Hence, in chinese Acupuncture,
Brain & Kidney have a creative working relationship. If Kindney essence is strong, it
provides nourishment to the Brain that sharpens memory, concentration & sight.
According to Chinese Acupuncture, kidneys are the origin of skill and intelligence.

If kidney essence is weak, then the Brain does not receive balanced nourishment
resulting in weakening of memory & concentration, dizziness occurs and distance-
sight and thinking weaken.

Nourishment of Bone & Bone marrow is done by kidney. Teeth are also part of
bones; so if kidney essence is weak, the bones too become weak and the teeth become
loose. In children retarded development of bones & pigeon chest is due to weak kidney
essence.

“Kidneys control the bone marrow... if the Kidneys have heat the spine will not be
straight, the bones will wither the marrow will decrease”.

"Chapter 44 of the Simple Questions"

(iii) Kidney regulates water element in the body :

According to the five element theory, kidneys regulate water element in the body.
In the lower warmer, regulation of water element is done by the kidney by opening &
closing the lower gate. The quantity of urine remains normal when kidney yang & kidney
yin are balanced and opening/closing of the exit gate takes place in a normal manner.

If kidney yang is deficient, opening of the exit Gate increases and the quantity of

urination freatly increases. When the kidney yin is deficient the exit gate closes, the
quantity of urination reduces and urine colour becomes dark.

Necessary Qi comes from the kidney for urine storage and secretion by the urinary
bladder.

In the Lower Warmer, small intestine and large intestine perform an important
role in the separation of turbid & clear fluid; this function of the intestines is also performed
under the control of kidney yang.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 13 - English

