TCM protocols for treatment of kidney disease

Kidneys obtain fluid from the lungs; some of this fluid is secreted out of the body,
some evaporates out on it own while some reherens to the lungs to keep them wet.

Kidney yang provides heat to the spleen to enable it to transform & transport the
fluids.

(iv) Reception of Qi for the body :

Lungs receive Qi of oxygenated air and flow the clean energy downwards to the
kidneys. The act of sending Qi downwards is done by the lungs and the act of retaining
this Qi there is done by kidneys. Thus a balance is ensured between Qi in the upper in
the lower parts. If the kidneys are unable to retain the Qi in the lower part, then this Qi
contravenes & goes upwards and produces congestion in the chest causing difficult in
breathing resulting in Asthma. This is give main causes of chronic asthma; balance of
Qi in the upper and lower part of the body is giving done by lungs & kidneys. If Qi
increases in the upper part of the body then breathing problem occurs in the upper part
and in the lower part back & heel pain occurs due to Qi deficieny.

(v) Kidneys open in the Ears :
“The kidneys open in the ears, if the kidneys are healthy, the ears can hear the
five sounds.” — Chapter 17 g “Spiritual Axis”
If kidneys are weak, the hearing gets impaired and tinnitus noise in the ears
comes.

(vi) Kidneys manifest in hairs :

“if the kidneys are strong, the teeth will be firm and the hair will grow well....... if
the kidneys are declining in energy, the hair will fall out and the teeth become loose.”
First chapter of “Simple Questions”.

If the hairs are getting thin, becoming grey or hairs are falling, then it means that
the hairs are not getting complete nourishment from the kidneys; & this can be due to
decline in kidney essence. So in such cases, treatment of kidneys should be done.

(vii) Kidneys control the two lower gates :

Of the two lower gates one is in the front and the other is behind. In the front gate,
one is for the urine and spermatic cord or ovum transporter and the back gate has
anus. Control of both the front & back gates in with the kidneys. Urinary track’s control

A Treatise on 69
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 13 - English

