TCM protocols for treatment of kidney disease

is done by urinary bladder but for this the necessary Qi to the bladder is provided by
kidney yang. If kidney is weak, the person is unable to control urine. Sperm is the outer
manifestation of kidney essence. If kidney Qi or essence is deficient, then the semen
becomes thin, discharges on its own & night-fall occurs. Even through the anus is a
component of the large intestine but for its functioning. It is dependent on kidney. If the
kidney Qi is weak, lose motions occur or there is prolapse of anus. For evacuation of
stool. Smoothness of anus due to fat, excretion pressure by the large intestine and
necessary Qi for opening & closing of the anus spinchure by the kidneys are helpful.
The neurological Qi to the anus comes from the kidney, If kidney is weak the capaci'ty
to retain urine and stool is reduced.

(viii) “Kidneys house the will power"

If kidney are strong will power will be strong, the brain will set correct goal and the
person will engage himself to achieve it whole heartedly. But if the kidney is weak, will
power reduces and the person goes stray from the goal.

Reduced will power causes depression and in such cases tonification of kidney
sometimes gives a lot of benefit.

Right kidney and Left kidney are two distinct organs :

Each person has two kidney :

(i) Left Kidney;

(ii) Right Kidney.

Left kidney is the main kidney; the right kidney is called "gate of vitality". This gate
of vitality houses the mind and this is the original Qi. In males this stores the essence
and in females, this is connected to the uterus. Hence, people have just one kidney
and it is called the left kidney.

Chinese literature tells that there are 6 yin & 5 yang organs; why? Because while
counting yin organs, kidney is called 2 organs. Left kidney is considered the proper
kidney and the right kidney is considered gate of vitality. Five yang organs are related
to five yin organs. The sixth and the extra yang organ is triple warmer. The left kidney is
yin organ and is related yang organ is urinary bladder. The right kidney is gate of vitality
organ and its yang organ is triple warmer.

In the ming period, the right kidney was not considered gate of vitality in China. It
was considered that there are two kidneys and in between them is the gate of vitality. In

(70 ) A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 13 - English

