TCM protocols for treatment of kidney disease

human body, gate of vitality is the ocean of life essence, this is a collective organ of
water and fire. In it resides both yin or yang and this decides birth and death. Gate of
vitality is the motive force for all the body activities because it is that fire which is
essential for life; it is also called true fire or Minister Fire. According to the fire element
theory, heart is related to fire energy and kidneys are related to water element. Body Qi
functions on the five element theory. But Heat and water, which becomes available
from heavenly Qi & are received as life essence are called gate of vitality and this is
located in between the two kidneys.

Gate of Vitality (Function) :

Gate of vitality is root of original Qi

Original Qi's location is in kidney; its switch to on or off or this original energy is
situated in between both the kidneys. The way lot of energy can be produced
from uranium, in the same manner from the essence of original Qi, energy can
be produced in abundance for the entire life. This energy helps in the production
of blood in the body. Also to achieve both energy & vitality & other goals in life are
provided by this vitality.

Gate of vitality provides fire for all the internal organs :

A decrease of heat in gate of vitality causes working capacity of all organs and
the person starts feeling weakness in body; also, mental depression occurs and
negative thoughts arise. Vitality reduces and the person starts feeling cold. In
such a case, right kidney should be toned and treatment at the point GV5%,
called 'kautsu' should be done. By treatment at GV5%, improvement occurs in
functioning of Heart, Kidney, Aorta, Peritoneum & Brain. By treatment at this
point, improvement in energy radiation of vitality occurs in the same way as occurs
in battery charging.

Gate of vitality warms the lower warmer :

With the help of the urinary bladder, the lower warmer evacuates fluids from the
body. For this the gate of vitality provides the necessary Qi and heat to the lower
warmer. If the gate of vitality is weak, then the lower warmer is deficient in
evacuation energy/heat & humidity may increase or odema.

A Treatise on 1
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 13 - English

