TCM protocols for treatment of kidney disease

Gate of vitality warms stomach & spleen to help digestion :

For transport, analysis & transformation of food & drinks the spleen requires
heat. This is received by spleen from gate of vitality. If it is weak then one to
deficient heat in spleen then problems or loose motions, weakness, cold limbs &
feeling of coldness by the patient will occur.

Gate of vitality regulates sexual function :

Gate of vitality is extremely necessary for healthy sexual relations. It provides life
essence and heatg to penis and uterus. Sexual act, reproduction ability,
adolescence and start of menses all depend on gate of vitality. Due to weak gate
of vitality, males have impotence and females have leukorrhea & infertility.

Gate of vitality helps kidneys in reception of Qi:

Energy is received in the body is through kidneys; the function is performed by
kidney yang to ensure that this functions uninterrapted continuously these has to
be harmony between chest's gathering Qi and lower abdomen's original Qi; and
for this harmony, necessary heat is available by gate of vitality.

When there is deficiency of heat in gate of vitality, then the ability of kidney to
receive energy reduces; this results in breathing ailments, asthma, heaviness in
chest and coldness of hands.

Gate of vitality assits the heart in its function of housing the mind

The heat and energy gate of vitality goes up from kidneys upto the heart and
provides the letter adequate heat for its functioning. Heart houses the mind; on
this, the gate of vitality helps the heart. If gate of vitality is weak and is unable to
five adequate heat, then the heart is not able to provide necessary & shades to

the mind resulting in the person feeling depression dissatisfaction and absence

of Vitality.

Dreams (related to Kidney) :

“When the kidneys are weak, one dreams of swimming after a shipwrech; if the

dream takes place in winter, one dreams of plunging in water and being scared."

“Chapter 80 of the Simple Question"

72 A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 13 - English

