TCM protocols for treatment of kidney disease

Salient features of the organ cosmological sequence

(i)
(ii)
(ii)

(iv)

(vy)

(vi)

All kidney problems are problem of deficiency.

There is no such thing as excess of kidneys.

Right from birth from God we receive a fix quantity of kidney essence or kidney
yang. This deficiency cannot be too much.

When we talk of excess kidney yang, then it means that kidney yin has become
deficient; hence comparatively kidney yang has become excess, actually, overall
kidney Qi is deficient.

The following sketch indicates that despite kidney Qi deficient, kidney yin or
kidney yang can comparitivity be excess deficiency. Hence, treatment is done of

deficiency.
Deficiency of kidney yin Deficiency of kidney yang

Normal Qi Level Normal Qi Level

Yin Yang Yin Yang

Let us start with water; this is because water is the basis for other elements.
Kidney is the base for all yin & yang of the body. Kidney is the body's original yin
& original yang. Kidney stores the body's life essence. And this essence is the
base for energy and mind.

All disharmonies stem from deficiency of kidney yin.

Treatment principle : Yin deficiency :

1.

Stage | : In case of kidney yin deficiency, relatively kidney yang will become in
excess. Adrenals will become hyperactive; hence when adrenals are hyperactive
then treat for kidney yin deficiency; this is because the adrenal gland is in the yang
part i.e. outside part of kidney. Deficiency of yin means deficiency of water, fluids,
cooling etc.; excess of yang means fire, drying up of fluids, heating etc.

Stage II: In Stage II Kidney yin deficiency in the long run causes liver yin
deficiency also.

Due to liver yin deficiency, empty fire rises and liver yang
becomes comparatively excess and this causes hyper thyroid, hyper
tension, disturbed vision, Hence in hyper thyroid disturbed vision and high
blood pressure etc links yin deficiency and kidney yin deficiency should be

treated
A Treatise on 75
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 13 - English

