30 | Laws of Treatment of Kidney Diseases

Every person receives life essence from birth in the form of fate & this life essence
is stored in the kidney. Hence, disease from birth are treated by kidney essence. Kidneys
function to create urine, hence in all urine related ailments treatment of kidney is done.

In human body, originator of vitality is the kidney, hence where vitality is lacking,
kidney should be treated.

Treatment of adrenal gland is done on kidney. Adrenal gland is situated on the
ontride part i.e. yang side of kidney, hence in case of hyperactive adrenal treatment
should be done of kidney yin deficiency & in case of hypoactive adrenal, treatment
should be done of kidney yang deficiency.

In case of Hypothyroid, treatment should be of kidney yang deficiency & in case
of hyperthyroid treatment should be of kidney yin deficiency.

In case of Nephritis - odema of kidneys - spleen & kidney yang deficiency should
be treated.

In case of odema starting from feet & going right upto the whole body, treatment
of kidney & Heart yang deficiency should be done.

In case of Emphysema — kidney not receiving Lung Qi - treatment as per Law
No. 14 should be given.

In case of menopause, treatment of Heart yin deficiency & kidney yin deficiency
should be done.

In case of excess urine, kidney yang deficiency should be treated. In case of
deficiency of urine kidney yin deficiency should be treated. In case of frequent urination,
treatment of kidney Qi deficiency should be done.

In case of night fall, treatment of kidney yin deficiency should be done. If night fall
occurs without dream, then treatment of kidney Qi deficiency should be done.

In case of chronic leucorrhoea, treatment of kidney Qi deficiency should be done
for the benefit of therapists, rules for kidney related diseases are given below and
these should be studied so that treatment thereby will ensure reaching at the root of the
problem & will benefit treatment of the therapist.

A Treatise on (449
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 13 - English

