Diagnosis of Urinary Tract
8 Diseases by Urine Testing

Blood circulates in the body.

It picks up many waste substances.

Kidney filters these waste products & expels them in urine.

Testing urine for high or low level of various chemicals reveals how the kidneys are

functioning. Urine tests look for presence of various substances like : glucose, protein,
WBC, RBC etc. Urine is composed of water (95%), & waste products and salts. Urine
is normally clear & yellow.

Cloudy urine may indicate the presence of pus with bacteria and white blood cells
due to :

(a) Urinary tract infection
The bacteria E. coli (Escherichia coli) lives in the digestive tract.
lt causes 80% of urinary tract infections (UTI) or cystitis in women.
From Digestive tract, E. coli comes in anus. From here it goes into women’s
urethra and UTI & cystitis ailments occur.
(b) The presence of crystals of salts from uric acid or from phosphoric acid.
A reddish hue of urine may indicate bleeding due to infection or inflammation of the
glomeruli in the kidneys.
Brown urine may contain muscle proteins excreted into the urine after severe muscle
injury.
Brown urine may contain broken down hemoglobin, if the blood leaks in the urine
from kidney, ureter or bladder disease.
Broken down hemoglobin in urine causing brown colour of urine indicates that
there may be hemolytic anemia. Hemolytic anemia results from breaking down or
destruction of RBC, which may be herditary or acquired & may be result of infection
or toxic effect of certain drugs.
Excess glucose in the urine may indicate diabetes mellitus.
Small amount of glucose in the urine is normal during pregnancy.
When blood sugar level are high in diabetes, glucose is excreted in the urine.
Urine sugar tests are a simple way of suspecting diabetes and helps in monitering
how well controlled diabetes is.
Protein in the urine may be due to the following kidney diseases causing damage
to the filtering system.

A Treatise on . (47
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 13 - English

