SECTION - A

An Introduction of
ACUPRESSURE / ACUPUNCTURE

Tao: Tao ix a natural force that creates all things.

Whole world or universe works under the rule of nature. Man is also a part of universe
so human life also works under the rule of nature. This process is automatic. The nature
and its rules and principles are called Tao.

(Yellow Emperor's text book of Physical Medicine 200 years B.C.)
- Written by Huan Di Nei Jing

Acupressure and Acupuncture is a natural treatment therapy. It balance the Qi and
body fluids. The place in the body, where Qi and body fluids are excess or deficient,
this therapy balances them. The flow and direction are normalize and the results are as
miracle.

Itimproves not only the physical health, but mental too. In any part of body, when Qi
and body fluids are blocked, it is called statis. By this treatment, the statis can be removed.
Itis done by removing the impediment. There are specific acu points on the body, which
removes the stasis and impediments, when pressure is given on them.

Qi : The Qi that make working not only the body but also the unvierse, is known as by
different name, in different countries. It is called Chi in China, Pran in India, qiin Japan, Vital
force or vital energy in western countries.

Main functions of Qi:

4. In human body, all voluntary or involuntary work or movement such as blood
circulation, breathing or digestion are done by the energy.

2. Producing the heat in the body and controlling the temperature of the body both
works are done by this Qi (Energy).

3. This energy Qi keep us alive. All working of brain are done by this energy (Qi).
This energy is called Shen in China. They called it conciousness or the power of
soul. It gives the power of thinking.

4. Qiprotects human beings by the changing of weather. It produces immune power
to protect from infection. This Qiis called Protective Qi in China.

Itis believed in China that Qi lives in heart and can be seen in eyes. When Shen
is deficient or disturb, the eyes become dull and a tendency of forgetfulness and
disturbed sleep develops.

A Treatise on 4
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture- - Part 2

