6) Small Intestine meridian

7) Urinary Bladder meridian

8) Kidney meridian

9) Pericardium or Circulation or Brain meridian

10) Tripple Warmer or Tripple Heater or Spine meridian

11) Gall Bladder meridian

12) Liver meridian

These 12 meridin are bilateral on the body. Along with these 12 meridian there are 2
more meridian called :

1) Governing Vessel or Dumo Meridian

2) Conceptional Vessel or Ren Mo Meridian

These two meridian are at the front and back center of the body. They are unilateral.

Acupoint : The Qiis invisible neither we can see nor touch it. In ancient time in China
powerful souls experienced it. By their soul power they recognized these meridians and
also some points on them. They discovered that by giving treatment on these points the

energy passing through these ways can be increased or decreased or influenced. They
named these points “Acupoints”.

The Qi flows in deeper part of body but acupoints are on the skin of human body or little
deeper. They understood that giving the treatment on acupoints the deeper part of body
can be influenced and disease can be cured. These wonderful acupoints are invented by
China, India, Korea, Russia and they became experts to cure human's physical and mental
disorders.

Direction of Qi flowing path. The starting and last poitns and their continuity :

The Qi have their own flowing direction starting points and last point. Qinever stop
some times Qi exchange their polaliry and some times without exchanging their polaliry
they change their pathway. The point on which Qi change their own pathway a new meridian
starts, which has its own direction, action and value.

The direction of a Qi in human body may be upper to lower or lower to upper some
times from hand and feet to peripheri to centre or peripheri to centre hand and feet. Whole
human body has a network of Qi.

Meridians are connecting on some points of body. These points are called convention
points or meeting points or junction points. The points where two meridian meet are called
passage point or luo connecting points. For example the luo connecting point of Heart
meridian and Small Intestine meridian is H 5.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture: - Part 2

