5. _ Itis believed in China that the power of living (Jing) is given by God, by birth. Body,
Brain and Soul is developed by Jing. Human being has limited breath to enjoy the
life. This power lies in Kidney and other power lies in organ source point of the
organs. By use of this power, human being can improve their thoughts and quality
of life. But can destroy their life by misusing this power.

We can get this energy by two ways :

1. ByGod giving power

2. Man Creating Power

God giving energy is a result of human acts that he earned by past life activities called

destiny. It is an “In Built Qi”, it can not be increased or decreased, it can be only balanced
only.

If this energy is increased in one part of body and decreased in another part of body

than we can transfer this energy from the increased part to the decreased part of the body.

By this way of balancing energy we can cure any disease, old or new.

Man gaining energy depends on:

a) Human's way of thinking

b) Way of Eating

c) Way ofLiving

d) Way of Behaving

We can balance this energy by positive thinking, healthy fooding, right way of living and

behaving. This energy can be transfer from one part of body to the another. It can be done
by treating the Qi receiver points on human body. These points are called own element
points or horary points. The treatment is given at the time of organ clock time. When a
treatment is given on horary point than it charges organ source point automaticly.

Meridian or Pulse : Qi flows continuously in human body. This Qi has its own fixed
way. This energy pathway is called Meridian. It is called Pulse in Ayurveda.

Organ Meridian or Organ Channel : The Qi that passes through human organ is called
by the name of that organ. For example Qi that passes through heart organ is called Heart
Meridian. In this way human body has main 12 organs. So there are 12 main meridians :

1) Lungs meridian

2) Large Intestine meridian
3) Stomach meridian

4) Spleen meridian

5) Heart meridian

2 A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture: - Part 2 )

