xiii) Listening No from the other Person : Try to understand and appreciate the
‘No’ communication from the other.
A person went to his neighbour to borrow his horse. he refused, and said that
some one had taken away the horse. In a while neighing of horse heared. The
person said to neighbour, Oh, the horse is inside the room.

Neighbour replied “You understand the language and voice of horse, but not

human's’
In the same way, we should understand the voice of man.We should understand
the ‘No’ without saying in word ‘No.’

xvi) Boulders on our Shoulders : Once, there is a intelligent but greedy King in
Greece, named Sisifus. The travellers in his country was murdered by throwing,
from a hill. The God gave him punishment for his cruel deed. He was also thrown
in a dark valley, and was given a cylindrical stone. He was ordered to pull this
stone to the top of hill. While as Boulder reached, near the top of hill, the cylindrical
stone was pussed down the valley. Sisifus was ordered again to push it up to hill.
in this way Sisifus was suffering continuously, by this punishment.

This continuous action can be compare with actions of human beings. Pushing
boulder on the top is rising stage. Rolling down shows still, have to do more. This
process occurs again and again.

This process tense our muscles. Though all muscle involved in pulling the boulder
up, but the muscles of Small intestine meridian, specially influenced. Small Intestine
meridian runs through arms, shoulder and neck. As we finish our work daily like
cleaning home, finishing file works but next day again we have to do these works.
It proves we are curred to work continuously. But we have to find out free time in
between to enjoy the life.

Treatment:
i) Stretch the body, close the eyes, breath deeply, feel vital energy in body.

ii) Don't feel that you are responsible for all work, dont feel that all is on your
shoulders.

ii) 1am the only one for all work - don't think so. Work smoothly and automatically.
iv) Take decision in time, implement it with full energy.
v) Leave the result on God.
vi) Dosome work for serving others.
vii) Dosome important work not only necessary.
Outside travel all do, inside travel few do
Necessary works all do, But important works, few do

A Treatise on 33
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture- - Part 2

