xv) Anxiety & Stage Fright : The gap between present and future is called Anxiety.
Worrying about the future is stage of fright.
Treatment: H5andH7

xvi) The Superiority Complex :
SuperiorityComplex : False feeling of pride for self.
Inferiority Complex : False reserve feeling for self.
“Superiority complex is a feeling of exaggerated self importance or striving. In
fact, showing superiority is to compensate, for the feeling of inferiority’ - Webster
to hide inferiority, person tells his very high level VIP relations etc.
Ariver full of water may pride that it is serving men and also the greenary of plants
are due to it. But when she meets sea, then it realises the greatness of sea. So
we should not pride.
Do not feel pride on self. Live in between, superior or inferior.

xvii) What to do & What not to do ? What should | do, and should not. What should
| accept and what should not. What rules should | follow what should not.
Tao says - Nothing is noble nor is narrow.
Do not bound yourself with boundary. Be boundless, accept thousands things
and thoughts. Dont bent, because God wants to give you highest place.

Body moves by itself, speech moves by itself
Thoughts come by itself, | see them just in silence

xviii) Accept Thy Lord’s wish :
Accept fate.
Accept thy wish.
But we realise God's wish, after the incident. Knowing God's wish before any
incidentis a art.
When we do any work, nature give us signal - it is good or bad. it is said that
nature gives signal seven times, do or not do. When we ignore nature's signal,
work was done, than the downfall begins. Decending is easy, but rising up is
difficult. Rising high in unfeverable condition is real courage.

When we accept the nature's guidence, then the life becomes easy. Hard efforts
end and things happen spontaneously. And the person becomes tention free. itis
possible only if we change the way we think and realise what is the God's wish.
The deeds will become perfect and more influenced.
What| can change, how | can change
Accept what I can change
O_Lord, please give me that power
To change all, what | can change

34 A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture- - Part 2

