How to recognise, give me that intelligence
What! can change & what | cannot change
Acceptance of what | cannot change

Bring change in what! canchan «&

xix) Accept Thy Lord’s wish : Let us forget past, let go disappointing thoughts. The

x)

importants to live in present moment. What we think today will decide our future.

This begining will bring ttemandous change in our future life. If we will think about
aincident of anger, fear, anxiety or revange they will distory us.

|f we want to lead a joyful life we should think about joyful things, person or
oiccasion. This will make us happy. Bad or good life, depends on our thoughts.

My personal experience is that physical diseases are the result of mental status.
When | suffer from cervical spondylitis then | think, where my thoughts become
hard and harmfull. When | get rid of that thoughts, my pain vanishes. The stiffness
of neck release automatically.

We should be flexible and polite. When we do not listen to others our neck stiff.
When | listen to others with love and patience, our neck release.

Metaphysical means, apart from physical. Goging in the deepest part of mind.
For example if a patient comes with the problem of constipation.

understand the reasons may be :

a) Patient don't want to expense money.

b) _Itmay be due to any past painful experience which he had still in mind.
c) Patientis not able to loose, useless things also.

Iwill try to teach you, how to get of fear. A person can not get anything new with
close and tight attitude. It can be done by changing attitude.

Distribute old things and make place for new. Say loudly - “| am leaving old, making
space for new. As you practice to leave, body will also leave, what is useless for
it- that is constipation.”

When we began to live in deep part of Heart, we feel divine power. This gives us
happiness and peace. We get rid of illness. Love destroys fear, anger. Life will fill
with joy, progress and health.

In the depth of my heart is a will of love

Whoever comes to me, receives love from me
My love is spreading in all 10 directions
Your love is reflected & flowing in my veins
Whatever | give, the more | receive
Water from well if withdrawn, becomes more pure

goa

A Treatise on 35
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture- - Part 2

