Urinary Bladder 8" Aug. to 7" Sept. 7" Feb. to 8" March

Kidney 8" Sept. to 7" Oct. 9" March to 8" April
Pericardium 8" Oct. to 7"" Nov. 9" April to 7" May
Tripple Warmer 8" Nov. to 7" Dec. 8"" May to 7" June

Gall Bladder 8" Dec. to 7" Jan. 8" June to 7" July
Liver 8" Jan. to6"" Feb. 8" July to 7" Aug.

In China a patient is treated according to date of birth by finding out the birth organ and
antibirth organ. Generally birth organ has excess of energy and antibirth organ has deficient
energy. So the energy of birth organ should be sedate and energy of antibirth organ shouldbe
tone. itis suggested to diagnose by other means also before treating birth organ.

Sea of Energy : Just as universe, we also have oceans of energy in our body and the
tiver like energy meridians end to them.

Irrigation : Man makes canals from rivers for irrigation. It the same way there are
energy canals in human body.

As we form ponds, dams on rivers to collect rain wter for future use, our body also has
inverters and batteries to store different types of energy which is used in case of emergency
by the body automatically. These points are known as organ source point.

Yin and Yang : Meridians have two polarities, positive and negative. They are called
Yin and Yang in China.

14) Yin Structural Energy In built robustness and capacity is Structural Energy
of a machine. It is called Yin Potential Energy
also.

2) YangFunctionalEnergy: The productivity the teething troubles and the
time in which a machine gets heated is known as
its functional energy. Itis called yang kinetic energy.

a) In Acupressure and Acupuncture the inner organ of human body are Yin. The
outer part of human body are Yang.

b) The solid part of humdn organ such as Heart, Pericardium, Spleen, Lungs, Kidney
and Liver are called Yin Organ. Tendon and bones are also Yin.

c) The hollow organs of human body such as Small Intestine, Large Intestine,
Tripple Warmer, Stomach, Urinary Bladder, Gall Bladder and Skin are Yang
organ.

d) Yinis structive and storage energy of human body. Yang is functional energy
of human body. It also protects human body from attack of disease.

A Treatise on 5
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture: - Part 2

