There are two types of arrows in the chart.

1. (i) The arrows on big circle is called Mother and Child Cycle. The arrow shows the
movement of energy from, one element to second element, second to third, third
to fourth and fourth to five.

2. Every element supposed to be the son of previous element, as wood is the son of
water and earth is the son of fire etc.

3. Each elementis supposed to be the mother of forward element. As wood is the mother
Of fire and fire is the mother of earth etc.

4. _ Energy flows from mother element to child element. Energy moves in the direction of
arrow. It is one way movement.

5. Deficiency of energy moves towards back direction of arrow.
(ii) The second type of arrows are shown inside the big circle.

Aarrow from water element, goes to fire element. Another arrow goes from fire
element to metal element etc.

Law of treatment, by these two types of Energy Movement :

a) The energy can transfer from one organ to another. Energy can not be increased of
decreased.

b) _ Itis done by treating Shu Point of meridians.
c) Energy is transfered from one place to another place by Shu Points.

d) Inner energy of body and organs are also treated by these Shu Points. Shu Points also
balance the energy.

GS

) Its only done when, one organs meridian is deficient and others is excess.
Ways by which the energy is transfered from one organ to other or one element to
the other element:

When energy is deficient, only in one element, it can be treated by “Passage Point”.
For example if wood energy is deficient. The organ of wood energy are Liver and Gall
Bladder. In both if Gall Bladder is deficient and Liver energy is excess, then passage point of
the deficient organ will be used, that is GB 37. In this way the excess energy of Liver will
pass to Gall Bladder. In this way, the energy of both organ with balanced.

On the other hand, if Liver is deficient and Gall Bladder is excess, the treatment is
given on passage point of Liver - Liv 5. In this way the energy of both organ will balanced.

C ‘A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture- - Part 2

