ii)

iii)

iv)
v)

vi)

St39_  - Excess energy in Large Intestine and deficient energy in Stomach
meridian causes numbness in foot. It can be cured by treating St 39.

Itis a case of anti-creation cycle. Son meridian has excess energy and
mother meridian has less. Energy moves from Son to Mother. When
St 39s treated.

St40 -  Drainout cough from Chest.

Syphon Points on Urinary Bladder and their utility :

UB59 —- — Drainout sinus fluid and relieves in pain and cure the pain near UB 2 the
inner side of eyebrow.

UB60 - Syphon outcervical and Sciatica pain.

UB61 - __ Itis the best point for Lumber pain, because of degeneration.

UB62 -  Calmsdown the hyper emotions, because of excess energy of Brain.

Numbness along the meridian pathway in body :

a) Acute numbness cured by giving treatment on one meridian.

b) Chronic numbness is treated on channel axis. For example if numbness is near
GB 32, 34. It is treated by Shao Yang Axis. that is Tw and GB Channel Axis.
The local points are also treated.

The law is that energy moves from Tw meridian (9 PM to 11 PM) to GB meridian

(11 PM to 1 AM). If energy is deficient in Tw meridian or stagnation then tone

Twmeridian. GB meridian should also toned. The channel axis will works properly and

numbness will cure.

Treat Yang Ming Axis (Li and St Channel Axis) for allproblems related to Parasympathetic

Nervous System.

Treat Tai Yang Axis (Si and UB Channel Axis) for all problems related to Sympathetic

Nervous System.

Treat Shao Yang Axis (Tw and GB Channel Axis) for all problems related to Central

Nervous System.

Method of Treatment :

o

If we need to tone both the meridians of Yang Channel Axis - Tone organ source point
of first meridian and sedate organ source point of second meridian for 40 minutes. It
will tone both the meridians.

For Example — If we want to tone Shao Yang Axis. First tone Tw meridian’s organ
source point- Tw 4 t and sedate GB meridian organ source Point - GB 40 J.

A Treatise on (61
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture- - Part 2

