Fundamentals of Yin and Yang :

© Yincorresponds to structive, material and somatic aspects.

Yang corresponds to activity motion, dynamics, function, actions.

© Structivity of yin may be affected by destruction, consumption, diminishion
This is called deption of yin. For example, ulcerating consumptive process are
due to depletion of yin.

© Structivity of yin may also be affected by an increased aceretion accumulation
sedimentation, concentration of substance in excess. This is called repletion of
yin. For example neoplasias, indurations, keloids, haematomas are due to repletion
ofyin.

G Yang may be decreased, exausted or weak. This is called depletion of yang
symptoms will be deminished drive and initiative, diminished warmth both physical
and mental, diminished speed.

OG Yang may be expanded. This is called hyperactive yang. Symptoms will be over
excitement, inflammation, raving madness.

External Disease

Reason or Cause of Exterior Disease : External diseases are the result of extemal
factors like excess cold or heat.

External diseases are the result of present disorders and may cause pain in joints
hands legs or head. Often changing weather causes neuralgia of hands and feet (shifted
pain or joints pain due to weather change). It may causes mild fever frequently. Sweating,
urine, stool etc. body fluids may be normal. Pulse may be superficial. Nose may be blocked
and tongue may be coated or noncoated.

Internal Disease

Cause of Interior Disease : Internal disease means internal disorders of the body
and they are chronic diseases. The causes of internal diseases may be negative thoughts,
un-appropriate diet, excess outings, excess sex, excess consumption of wine, stress etc.
External disease when sits deep in the body tums into chronic.

Disorders happened in past causes internal diseases. Internal diseases may cause
pain in chest, abdomen or wholebody. It causes continuous high fever and excess thirst.
Gastrointestinal disorders causes nausea, diarrhoea, hiccup, belchings etc.

Internal diseases causes loss of appetite and foul smell in mouth. Distented abdomen.
The quantity of urine becomes less and of dark colour. Pulse will be submerged. Mouth
femains dry and tongue has brown or black coating.

41 0 ) A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture- - Part 2

