b) External conditions are excess conditions, since there is presence of
pathogenic factor.
c) Examples of purely deficient condition :

1) The patient has spleen Qi deficiency with symptoms : lack of appetite,
tiredness, loose stools. Here, treatment will be tonify the spleen.

2) Apatient has blood deficiency with symptoms : vertigo, blurred vision,
poor memory, scanty periods. Here, the treatment will be tonify the
blood.

3) Apatient has mixed deficiency/excess symptoms but primary factor is
deficiency of stomach Qi allowing itself to be attacked by liver Qi. The
symptoms are : tiredness, no appetite, loose stools, slight dull epigastric
pain & slight nausea. The last two symptoms, the epigastric pain &
nausea are due to stagnant liver Qi attacking stomach. In this case,
treatment will be to tone the stomach Qi. When stomach will get
strenght, it will not allow the liver Qi to attack it.

2) How and when to expel the pathogenic factor ?
Wore a wa sik ae Front arex wt ?

It includes any method which eliminates the pathogenic factors. The pathogenic
factor may be internal or external.
The pathogenic factors are eliminated by using sedation method, bleeding or
cupping.
When the pathogenic factor will be expelled, any obstruction caused by it will be
removed. This will indirectly strengthen the upright Qi.
dm 4 oer 2 f& “Meret oF ved at af acart Sal at aes Fret
Ifthe disease pattern is of an excess condition and the pathogenic factor is expelled,
the patient will feel better and have more energy because the obstruction of the
pathogenic factor is removed. In this case do not tonify Qi. If the Qiis tonified, the
patient will become worse because tinifying Qi in acute exterior conditions tends
also to tonify the pathogenic factors. Thus it aggravates the problems.

Example :

If a patient has an attack of external wind cold with symptoms aversion to cold, a runny

Nose, sneezing, a stiff neck and a floating pulse.

e This is an excess condition.

e Treat this condition by expelling the wind cold by sedating the related points.
