disease. Analysis of their causes is possible in Ayurveda. Reasons for such
ailments have been indicated in Ayurveda as actions performed by the person
in previous births. The current life can be termed as a continuation of the
previous lives. Net result of actions performed in earlier lives decides the
form of life (@if™) in the current birth of the person. Out ofa total of 84,00,000
lives as propounded in Indian-scriptures only the human life is of Karma
(#4) yoni whereas all others are only Bhog Yonis (AMT aif) - i.e., only to
reap the previous lives' harvest. Actions performed in previous lives are called
destiny or God's and those performed in the current life are termed as
Purusharth (Fest). Thus it can be said that past, present and future are
connected to each other like a chain and all three are a result of Kaal (#17).
The present is a mirror of the past and a determinant of the future; hence to
live in the present, knowledge & understanding of the present, and to live a
righteous life based on following Ayurved will be the deciding factors for
ones future.
Tri origin of Time (past, present and future)

Present life is continual life process of past life. It is mirror of past life. Past
life can be determined on the basis of principles laid down in ‘Sharir Sthan'
of Charak Samhita in respect of origin & constituents of life process. It is in
the form of dialogue between Bhagwan 'Aatreya' & Swami Agnivesh (Guru &
Shishya). A long questionnaire has been put by Agnivesh and all such questions
are answered by Maharishi Aatreya in respect of various stages of life process
from conception - origin of foetus, birth, death, in formation of foetus and
its well being/health or ill health, male or female all are determined by three
factors — past karma of self & karmas of father and mother. Therefore child
is a derivative of above three factors. Also birth of healthy, sick or crippled.
with weak or robust constitution (af) all depends on them.

Crippled baby in home reflects the past life of self & also that of parents.
Thus time factor (continual of life process) and Karma - determine the quality,
specy, longevity, status of health, wealth and education and time of demise
from this world. Apta Purush — persons well versed in scriptures can know &
predict all above things by virtue of calculations based on time & space (place
of birth - latitudes & longitudes of the place).

(ra)
