In Ayurveda, the cause & method of treatment of the above named three types
of diseases have been clearly analysed. Ailments that affect the body in the
present times due to causes of Time (Ie), due to good/bad deeds performed
in previous births, can be cured by God dependant methodology which is different
and absolutely wonderful compared to all other methods of treatments. It has
been observed that at birth, a child born deformed or with some physical invalidity
is definitely due to the result of the child's & the parents previous birth's deeds
and the invalidity/deformity results in the whole life suffering for both the child
& the parents. Treatment for such ailments is possible in Ayurveda in the form
of God dependant methods. In vedic mantras cure of result of bad deeds
performed in previous births is feasible and this is the salient feature of
Ayurveda.

O Destiny (2a):
“qd wared otra caffe meat”

Action performed in the past life is called destiny. In divine oriented treatment
proper pronunciation of Vedic & Pauranic mantras is the main part. All diseases that

form a part of divine dependent are all related to previous births because, “Ary aftad
at ae aifeerdefa’ and “sayaaa stated Gi HAI” Therefore this is treated as area of

acts performed in previous births, since people suffer from diseases which are related
to acts done in past life.

Just as both body and mind (separately or jointly) are the root of all diseases, in
the same way both body and mind are the root of all happiness and kaal is considered to
be the cause of happiness if in harmonious with sense organs.

Physical ailments like paralysis, leprosy, skin itching, scurvy, pain, joint diseases,
fever. ear, nose/throat diseases, heart diseases, kidney, spleen etc. diseaes, constipation.
headache ete. - all come under the category of physical ailments. Mental ailments like
sexual ailment, fever, excitement, depression, madness etc. ailments and sadness &
feeling of unhappiness illness, all these three come under triorigin & the ultimate
level of disease. If a member of the family suffers from cancer, the entire family
suffers from sadness. Similarly, if a member of the family becomes seriously ill, that
becomes a reason for sadness of the whole family. In the same way, if in a family an
