One should have balanced sleep. Untimely and sleeping at wrong time (fT #1
feat ait), excessive sleep at improper time (fast #1 afer) and not sleeping either
duritg day or during night (fIaI #1 start a eat) is harmful. Thus these sleeps are
like Kyal ratris (Tet UA). So for these who want a happy life and long age should leave
these srohibitive sleep (&, Sift, frzat) and should pursue a balanced sleep (G7% Fst

447 This is a fundamental principle to remain healthy. Day time sleeping has been

spCified only during summers because during the period of low nutrition people with

veak and rough constitution have increased wind and due to nights having shorter
‘duration, it is better for day time sleeping. Sleeping during day time, Kapha increases
and so increase of Kapha in period of low nutrition becomes necessary for improved
health. In seasons other than summers, day time sleeping results in Kapha increase and
attack of Pitta. Hence,one should not sleep during day time in other seasons. Day time
sleeping also causes headache, heaviness in body, poor digestion, reduced Agni, edema,
nausea, clod and cough, pain in half the body, urticaria, boils, itching, dizziness, poor
memory, fever, inability of organ functioning, throat ailments, increase of toxin
movements - are all the problems that happen with day time sleeping.

© Sleep - importance in Life :

Ragel aerssereta IT: |S Aa:
TacTeRayet a witernreed fagred:

Charak Sanhita; Sutra Sthan 21/51

The way taking properly prepared food is essential for body's safety, in the same
way, proper planned sleep provides happiness. Both obesity and weak body are caused
one to sleep and food. pe\-3 RG

3) Brahmacharya (Celibecy) : yor

This is importance in life's first ashram (3134) in scriptures. During this period,
several rules and regulations are specified in which the seventh tissue (saving semen)
is the most important. During co-habitation (sexual act with wife) the discharge of
semen that takes place for the creation of a child, is the proper utilisation of semen. It
has generally been seen that in bad company, young boys and girls damage their
brahmacharya (celibecy) resulting in the semen vessels becoming weak. During night-
