Neocortex -

Nervous System-

Recently evolved six-layered portions of the cerebral cortex
(found in mammals); sometimes referred to as the “isocortex”;
the neocortex occupies the bulk of the cerebral hemispheres.

Extends throughout the entire body and connects every organ to
the brain; can be divided into the central nervous system (CNS)
and the peripheral nervous system (PNS); the basic building
blocks of the nervous system are nerve cells or neurons.

Neural Connectivity - Estimated from length of dendritic trees of cortical neurons.

Neuron -

Occipital Lobe -
Olfactory Bulb -

Parasympathetic -
Nervous System

Parietal Lobe -

The basic building block of the brain; these cells receive input
from other nerve cells and distribute information to other
neurons; the information integration underlies the simplest and
most complex of our thoughts and behaviors.

The posterior lobe of the brain; involved with vision (the
“occipital cortex” is also referred to as the “visual cortex”).
Structure at the rostral end of the telencephalon that is involved
in smell.

One of the two systems that makes up the autonomic nervous
system; a parasympathetic response constricts pupils, stimulates
salivation, constricts airways, slows the heartbeat, stimulates
digestion, etc.

Located behind the frontal cortex (and central sulcus); involved
in perception of stimuli related to touch, pressure, temperature,
and pain.

Peripheral Nervous - Portion of the nervous system that incluces all the nerves and

System (PNS)
Pituitary Gland -

Pons -

neurons OUTSIDE the brain and spinal cord.

Small gland which secretes hormones located at the base of the
skull.

Part of the metencephalon in the hindbrain. It is involved in motor
control and sensory analysis... for example, information from
the ear first enters the brain in the pons. It has parts that are
important for the level of consciousness and for sleep. Some
structures within the pons are linked to the cerebellum, thus are
involved in movement and posture. .
