An experienced therapist should diagnose a patient's ailments by adopting
reliable assessed visible and guessing all three methods. Therapist who has
correct knowledge of the Shastra should attempt to learn the correct ailment
by discussing the subject properly and then a decision of the disease should
be made. A fter this, he should concentrate on the treatment. An expert therapist
well versed in treatment is never unsuccessful in diagnosing the specific
disease.

5) Triads of Dravya in Ayurveda :

(i)

(ii)

Some dravyas are that dilute the Doshas (@I9) i.e. they sedate Vata, Pitta,
Kapha in the body. Vata, Pitta, Kapha are named dynamic vital forces. For
example, hot, fatty,heavy attributes of pitta and kapha eatables respectively
are sedated by dry, cold, light attributes of Vataj eatables. By eating fried
foods, obesity increases. This is a well known fact. From Ayurveda's point of
view by eating dry, light food , obesity can be removed. In modern times,
obesity has become such an ailment which though is not fatal but makes one
difficult to live. Diseases of heart and paralysis are prone to occur. In
Ayurveda, food, life style and thoughts (STAR, faeX, sek) these three
principles have been given great importance. In obesity, food and life style
are important. To reduce/remove obesity, the useful food should be such
which can make body tissue thin and weak. By keeping oneself sedentary
whole day, obesity and kapha increases. Walking, moving around, all these
reflect vata and wind. From Ayurveda's point of view, vata makes one subtle,
light and thin. Hence, wind/vata type foods help reduce obesity;
simultaneously, walking, in course of time, reduces kapha. Here, it is also to
be noted that obesity is dependant not only on food habits but, in some cases,
on genetic and hormonal problems also.

Some times combination of food products produces problems that cause
body elements to be polluted - for example, with milk : mixture of pulse and
tice, urhad pulse, curd or similar antifood. Nowadays, breakfast generally
consists of bread-butter (with a little sprinkling of salt) taken with milk is
