&
_~> Nij Ailments : those occur due to body's Vata, Pitta, Kapha problenti™ } a

”»
~ Aagantuj Ailments : Accident, injury, attack, poison use ghost etc. - gto :)

N

Maanas Ailments : these occur when a desired object is not received but an
undesired objects is received. Mental ailments occur due to anger, sadness, fear,
happiness/sadness, virtue, joy,humility, stealing, lust, greed etc.

O Repetition of Acupuncture's Eight Principles in Cosmos and Body:

(i) Hot & Cold

(ii) Deficiency & Excess

(iii) Yin & Yang

(iv) Internal & External

As stated before the occurence of day and night is due to two factors :

(i) Planetary movement

(ii) Hot and Cold

These facts are related to cosmos from scientific point of view, these changes can
be termed as physical and chemical. The part of day is due to planetary movement and
it is physical change and days being hot and nights being cold are due to chemical
changes. It is well known that the entire cosmos receives energy from the sun and this
energy is in the form of heat. Due to this energy, cosmos hot and cold states take place.
Wind and water humidity is in same form or the other dependant on sun's rays and in all
the three there is inseparable relationship. In Rigveda, Vayu, Jal and Agni have been
stated as the basic elements; these also represent the tri origin state in Ayurveda.

The aforesaid mentained states of cosmos is established in the correspondence
with the human body. For example, the body is based on the energy obtained from
food. On taking food, all body organs become active-first of all, the food that is taken
is broken down in small micro size by the teeth and for this purpose, God has created
32 teeth in the oral cavity. All the four types of teeth, working in different ways, convert
the food into minute particles. After this, the remaining components of the digestive
system in which mainly stomach, pancreas, duodenum, liver, gall blader, glands presents
in the small and large intestines secrete various hormones convert the food in various
forms. First of all, the masticated food is converted into bolus by the chemicals in
