gastric juices secreted from glands in the stomach walls. After this, pancreatic juice
from pancreas bile from gall bladder, chemicals secreted from small intestines
completes convert the foods texture, shape, colour etc. which produce the enegy
transporting blood tissue. This normally provide energy to the body but also functions
keeping the body hot and cold as required. As is known, when body temperature reduces
and drops to zero, the person is declared dead; when temperature increases beyond
98.6 °F, then a state of fever occurs and if increase is more than chances of organs/
sub-organs of the body getting affected increase which can make the person's body
sick. The need for mentioning all these is that breaking up of the food by teeth is a
physical phenomenon and the conversion by secretions from various organs of the
digestive system resembles a chemical conversion and this keeps the body cool and
warm respectively and points to reduction or increase of energy int he body. All these
states point to and establish correspondence relationship between cosmos and the body.

To establish tulyarthta (correspondence) is well according to Ayurveda's important
principles.

In Acupuncture's main principles, five elements, six energies and eight guiding
princples are all fundamentals of Chinese Acupuncture. The entire Acupuncture's
concepts and structure are woven around these principles. These eight principles :
i) yin, 2) yang, 3) internal, (4) external, 5) deficiency, 6) excess, 7) hot, 8) cold.
According to Chinese the five elements are wood, fire earth, metal and water. On the
Ayurvedic fundamentals, in relation to Acupuncture's rules and principles in Ayurveda
instead of five elements, not only the five panchmahabhoot, but nine dravyas and their
totality - 10 dravya of elements have been stated. The 10th element has been seen as
Tam (darkness). Apart from this the five mahabhoot's (711) have been described as
their attributes. Five action-organs and five sense-organ have been described as
apparatus of the five physical mahabhoots and the metaphysical dravyas viz., Kaal, Disha,
Mann and Atma. Thus, the three fundamental organs viz., Atma, Body and Organs are
the basis for creation of the body.

As mentioned earlier, in the analysis of cosmos and body, heat and cold i.e., hot
and cold, both these energies are fully established. As far as deficiency or excess is
concerned, it has been mentioned that sun is of the center of the planetary system, is
