the centre of energy and those which are far from the sun, there energy will definitely
be less and which are nearer the sun's heat energy will be more. The measure of sun's
energy is the sun's rays and the internal energy in them. Hence deficiency and excess
principles are also established by the above facts. As mentioned earlier, all dravya
(elements) have duality - For example, day - it is automatically divided into day and
night. The two states female and male combine to establish the humanbeing because
males alone or females alone canot increase the sequence of creation/development.
Two sides of a coin front and back these represent two states of elements which in
Chinese Acupuncture are called yin and yang. Infact, this is the principle of duality
which is fully proved by Indian scriptures and Ayurveda. As far as the principle of
internal and external is concerned, it is proved at every stage in Ayurveda. In the first
stage, their attributes are intrinsic to the panchmahabhoots and they are seen as
combined; i.e., in Jal has intrinsic coldness, agni has heat, prithvi has hardness and
stability. vayu has movement and akash's non-resistance, fulfill the internal and external
principles.At the same time, complete Ayurveda is based ont he integration of Atma
and body. Body is outward and visible and atma is internal and being minute is invisible.
It can thus be concluded that whatever rules and principles have been postulated in
Chinese Acupuncture, they are proven by Ayurved. Ayurveda being infir.ite. it includes
all methodologies and thoughts and all of them are absorbed in it.

© Acupuncture's principles (Eight), Physiology and Ayurveda all testify
Tulyarthata ;

In physiology, the thoughts and principles established by scientists are same in
Chinese Acupuncture and Ayurveda; these are being analysed hereafter. The importance
which blood and other tissues have in Ayurveda is no less important in physiology. In
modern times, the most prevalent and potent treatment therapy is allopathic and it is
generally based on the analysis of blood. Blood test routine or specific, both are
important. Where haemogram is general test but lipid, liver, kidney profile, measuring
the lungs capacity through blood gases testing of different types of antigens and
antibodies to assess measure grave diseases like cancer are specific testings of blood.
Through these tests, it is becoming possible to obtain complete knowledge of ordinary
and specific diseases. Apart from blood, stool as described in Ayurveda, and tests on
stool, urine and sputum can provide information of ordinary to specific diseases and
the can be properly treated. Here, on the one hand in Allopathic therapy, tissues and
