In all the herbs/medicines useful in therapeutic treatment, their Ras (juice/taste)
is the main thing. As the Upanishad Rishi writes -‘gfreat attaera:, aiaftinaisan,
sag ta: WAS: YR, HAT UT PRASHANT: SIH, AA GRA Ta sera
aera Taree Gears wea teat wrote, | ardtsfr weet were,
drifaarareatstt yreagit varia wa’!

All dravyas in earth are medicines and everything harvested from earth and
subsequent food grains produce all the tissues and finally semen which is most important
for creation of humanity. The above shlok clarifies that Retas has been called Purush
i.e., a person's body is full of medicinal valuables. The aforesaid lines amply clarify
that during intake of food, one must select food that suit one's body constitution and
ailment(s), if any. Sweet taste is from Jal and Parthiv elements, sour taste in from
Prithvi and Agni elements, salty taste is from Jal and Agni elements, pungent is from
Vayu and Agni elements, Bitter is from Vayu and Akash elements and astringent taste
is produced by vayu and parthiv elements. Hence, when deciding what food to take, we
should, based on the Panchmahabhoots decide on the matter for a healthy/unhealthy
and wholesome wrong diet. Healthy and wholesome diet keeps the body tissues balanced
and in harmony and in an opposite state becomes responsible for attack of diseases.
For example, to diabetics, sweet tasting foods are unhealthy and harmful; hence they
should not take such foods which have extra content of sugar. Normally. rice, potation,
sweet potatoes, sweets, icecream and sweet fruits are unwholesome for diabetic patients.
For heart patients, fried foods and food with extra fat is unwholesome and harmful
because all such foods produce a lot of toxins which create blockade in arteries. Based
on the taste, every food matter one can decide what extra matter they contain. For
example, radish has two rasas; they are astringent and pungent. Astringent is Vayu and
Parthiv (2, 5). With this analysis, it is clear that radish's constitution has Vayu and
Parthiv element's prominence. Parthiv are matter which take time in digestion. Due to
prominence of Vayu (and Akash), this is used a lot in salads which function to excite
stomach fire (3éuf). Radish increases stomach fire but, it self, it takes long to digest.
Similarly, Cucumber (GR) is astringent (€T%) in taste and it also is taken as salad
ahead of a meal. As it has vayu, it has cold in nature so that it is wholesome to migrain
patients but those whose joint pains increase during whiters, taking of cucumber is not
helpful and this is the reason why cucumber does not growin emiters. Normally,
