Beth smn te Fi — dade Melo phy poblm.

Cerebrum : This is the largest part of brain. This is above & infront of other
parts. It is divided into left & right hemispheres. The left part operates & controls all
the activities of right side of the body and the right part performs all the conscious &
unconscious activities of the left side of the body.

Particular part of cerebral performs a specific activity. Ifa particular part of cerebral
is damaged, then its related activity is also effected. Activities connected with
intelligence are performed and controlled by parietal, occipal and temporal lobes.
Activities connected with movement (motor activities) are performed & controlled by
the pyramid shaped cells in the front part of Rolando Fissure (aa). The activities of
thinking, learning, walking etc. are performed and controlled by some particular parts of
brain like sensory area, frontal association area and motor areas in which respectively
knowledge, association and motor nerve cells exist.

a Cerebrum : activities performed & controlled by :
1) Sensory function : These can be divided into three parts :
(a) | Somaesthetic ( ate ) Sensitivity :
In this comes the physical activity, temperature and touch. The origin of
these impulses is based in that part of the brain which is situated just
behind the Rolando fissures in the parietal lobe. From cells in different

parts of the body, the nervous impulses that reach in this part of the brain
give us an indication of 'temperature' & ‘touch’.

(b) Visual Sensitivity ( =f arya ) :
The visual centre is located in the occipital lobe. The sense of objects
that the eyes see, their identification & sensitivity is from the cells in
this part. From the right part of both the eyes, the nerve impulses reach
the right cortex's visual area; from the left part of both the eyes the nerve
impulses reach the left cortex's usual area.

(c) Auditory Sensitivity ( staat Waeft arqea ) :
The location of auditory sensitivity is in the temporal lobe and the
experience of hearing is from this area only. The nerve impulses that are
generated from the cells in the ears, reach the temporal lobe which gives
us the hearing experience.

BI.¢ ALL Pipria Aes —
