During walking or running, cerebellum coordinates function of the muscles, joints
and different organs in such a manner that all activities are harmonious with each other
properly at all times and there is no hindrance in the movement. Information about
posture of different parts of the body keeps coming to the cerebellum through muscles,
joints and the semi-lunar tubule of the ear. Cerebellum conveys these information to
the cerebrum. After this, cerebrum through nerve fibres of motor centre, compels the
joints & muscles to stay in normal position. Thus, the state of the body remains normal.
The responsibility of keeping balance of the body is on cerebellum. In the
absence of or after an injury to the cerebellum, it has been found that the body loses its
balance; its sensory organs and digestive power remain normal but walking becomes
effected & becomes abnormal. During walking, the legs wobble and the person cannot
walk straight correctly in one direction & he cannot even stand properly. The
muscle movement also does not remain in his control. Trembling of hand and rotating
the eyes continuously are symptoms of this ailment and body's desired spread does not

remain satisfactory.
© Spinal Cord:

In common parlance, spinal cord is called back (4). Seeing the back side of the
body at a glance, it looks like a long bone from neck (ae) to pelvis (fda). It is a part
of the Central Nervous System. It is white coloured. strong and thick cord-like and
goes upto the lumbar vertebrae. Its length is about 45 cms. Starting from lower part of
medulla oblongata & coming out of Foramen Magnum of Occipital bone, via the vertebral
column goes upto the first lumbar vertebra. Animals with tail like dogs & cats, have the
spinal cord in the entire spinal column. But in human beings, it is a little smaller &
terminates at the first lumbar vertebra.

If the spinal cord is taken out of the body, it appears like a long white cylinder, but
it is not hundred percent cylindrical. In a transverse section ( TIF Fe), it appears
oval & so is a little flat in both front & back. Its thickness is also not uniform throughout.
In the cervical and lumbar region, it is comparatively thicker. Below the spinal cord,
several nerves appear coming down which divide into several branches called spinal
nerves. Due to the spinal nerves being made of soft nerve fibres for their safety, the
vertebrai & inside them, there is Duramatter, Arachnoid & Piamatter like in the brain
(aftas-te-aea Aft Hem); Vertebral spinal nerves come out of the cord via the lumbar
