In the above form, 22 pairs of ganglion branches are arranged which communicate
with the central nervous system through the spinal cord and which pass outwards from
cord to ganglia & inward from ganglia to cord.

Other sympathetic ganglia are placed in relation to these two great chains of ganglia
and with thin fibres form sympathetic plexuses :

1) Cardiac plexus-placed near the base of the heart and sends branches to it &

to the lungs;

2) Coeliac plexus-lies behind the stomach & extends in the abdominal cavity;

3) Mesentric plexus, also called hypogastric plexus-lies infront of sacrum and
extends in the organs in the pelvis.

OG Functions :

Activities of several organs are performed and controlled by sympathetic nerves.
They have several activities; in coordination with skin nerves, they ensure functioning
by involentary muscles of the skin. Blood vessels in the skin contract due to their
action and heart, brain & muscles receive extra blood & thus cause increase in blood
pressure. The sweat glands produce more sweat. By reaching inside the organs of
stomach with splanchnic nerves, they control the intestinal movements. Due to them
only, glycogin is produced in the liver and then it is transformed into glucose. GIT's
activity & secretions reduce due to sympathetic impulses. Their impulses increase
heart beat, urinary bladder walls loosen and sphincter muscles contract.

‘Adrenalin’ chemical is formed in the kidneys’, glands by function of sympathetic
nerves that balance and control the body temperature. In conjunction with it, the assisting
fibres act on the liver which increase glucose there and it effects blood vessels. It
balances blood inside the blood vessels and the water present in tissues around them.
When water decreases in tissues, then water passes from blood to the tissues and vice
versa. Whenever needed, energy comes in the body according to the occasion. Generally,
it has been noticed that when attacked, one immediately gets ready to face the opponent.
This energy is produced due to adrenalin and sympathetic nerves' action. In this situation,
body muscles become stiff, blood circulation increases, face becomes red, skin hairs
stand and nostrils blow, etc. All this is due to the activity of the sympathetic nervous
system.
