age commencement of menses is an indication of start of motherhood from
a young girl. If menstrual flow does not start, then the young lady may be of
any age her motherhood will be doubtful. In the same way in young boys of
twelve to fifteen years of age if beard hair & moustaches do not appear, their
fatherhood is doubtful. All this is the result of Time. With increasing age.
physical development and changes are observed only upto a certain age limit.
The first part of life is of development and the second part is related to
degeneration, hence, it is necessary to discuss at a micro level, about the
cosmic age and human age. In Ayurvedic literature, the entire age of cosmos
is divided into the four Yugas (G7 : HT, Fa, BR, Bey) constitute
longivity of Time. This is a division of cosmos (SIS) and from childhood to
old age is a division of age of a human being; it is an indication of Time. Thus.
when we compare the cosmos (eS) with the human being (f97S), the Satyug
is childhood, Tretayug is youth, Dwaparyug is middle age and Kaliyug
corresponds to old age. In Indian scriptures, Kaliyug's longivity is considered
as 4,32,000 years, Dwapar's as 8,64,000 years, Tretayug's as 12,96,000 years
and Satyug's is 17,28,000 years. In these Yugas, human being's age, starting
from Kaliyug to Satyug, has been considered respectively as 100, 200, 300
& 400 years. This is an indication of result of Kaal.

According to Ayurveda the division of Kaal is Nimesh (F744), Kashtha (#737),
Kalaa (eT), Muhurt (Fed), Ahoratri (31@RTF), Paksha (481), Maas (Month,
A), Ritu (Season, %q), Varsh (Year, ag), Yug (47) which are all divisions of
Kaal in which Nimesh is the smallest unit and Yug the largest unit. But
including Kaal, all belong to elements Kaal. The age of cosmos is estimated
in Yugas and that of a human being in years. Thus there is similarity in the
Kaal (age) of Cosmos and of Pinda (human) and in addition to the standard
Five elements-Kaal is the Sixth element which has been named for treatment
purposes in Ayurvedic Acupressure, as the sixth origin. On account of the
important role of Kaal in human life Kaal has been accepted as a controller.
In our scriptures & in our lives too, Kaal is looked upon as potent force & all
efforts are made by everyone to avoid its bad effects & Kuchakra. In fact
Kaal is an component of our body. One needs not be afraid of Kaal but there

Gs
