Here, the shloka speaks in a principled form comprehens i.e. the nature of
circulation system in the body. Here the flow of blood through arteries and veins in the
arms - legs, head and trunk, organs (eyes, nose, ears, skin, tongue) is approved by
physiology. Atma possessing attributes is indicative of the entire energy system and
mind and its subject is ndicative of brain's limbic system from where emotions, reasoning
and character traits orginate. Mind is a fountain of thoughts. In Ayurveda, all thesehave
been indicated as dependant on the circulation system. This is a wonderful subject. A
reflectionon this makes it clear that blood provides nutrition to the mind (44) and to its
subjects. Hence, irrespective of whether it is nervous system or the energy system,
allhave indications that they receive nutrition from the blood. Hence, the body remains
completely healthy only from the heart's system and therefore, all in all dependant on
it.

From treatment point of view, nutrition through arteries and cleaning through veins
can be done in two ways. The three parts of head (middle, right and left) and meridians
of ten-ten arteries of each have been identified. Similarly ten meridians each for the
two legs, two arms and trunk's three parts, i.e., a total of 100 arteries and 100 veins
have been identified. Thus, ailments that occur in a part of the body, can be treated on
the basis of the circulatory system and this has been explained in the next chapter.

Main ailments of the circulatory system are :
Temporary or Chronic blockage of arteires.
Athero Sclerosis.

Treatment is feasible of Vata, Pitta, Kapha type various ailments of the blood
flowing in arteries. Similarly, treatment is easily possible through an identified artery
of specific parts of the body of diseases like infection, temporary blockade due to

_ injury, skin disease in the respective part, badness, itching, leucoderma, pain,
. swelling etc. The treatment have been included in Dhanvantari Ayurvedic Acupressure
book.
