(c)

Patients of heart & kidney have greater suffering as such a greater percentage
of fatality from June to August. Further from November to February i.e.
hemant & winter seasons, it has been seen that there is automatic improvement
in their health & decrease in the number of patients. This is fully coroborated
by Ayurveda's above quoted dictum and a guide for the future. This is a result
of Kaal. With this knowledge severity of diseases and beneficial effects can
be utilised to give relief in ailments.

India is mainly an agricultural country. The entire economy revolves round
this fact. Majority of country's population gets food & nutrition from the
agriculture produce by the effect of seasons'-rains, temperature & air
pressure. This indicates seasons' effect. Hence our entire agriculture and
economy depends upon seasons i.e., upon Time. Excessive rains & floods
destroy our economy. Drought results in shortage of food & finally famine.
Normal monsoons bring wealth and development, Thus excess, shortage or
normalcy of desired Time are the three divisions which are supported by
Ayurvedic concepts. Their clear effect is perceptible directly & indirectly,
not only in our country but in the entire world.

Metabolism of Time :

Weather, Season, Climate :

In the body all types of changes are possible due to metabolism that takes
place due to the action of hot & cold. In physiology in pH the balance of hot
& cold of blood is a complete example of this. A similarity appears in the
form of Time. Based on temperature, air pressure & humidity the division of
Time is known as weather, season & climate. Actually these are basically
metabolism of Time.

In each day there are 4 Prahar (3%); the first part'is in the form of Brahma
Muhurt (se Wed) at about 4 AM. for meditation, thinking and absorbing & is
most important & useful. From the power of Brahma (3@!) by doing Yoga
person can become healthy, wealthy and wise. After this the period of dawn

from 4 AM. to 8 AM. fresh energy becomes available for doing new deeds.
Then from 8 AM. to 12 noon is the midday time 12 noon to 4 PM. is afternoon,
