Chapter

Extremities

Laws of Extremitie wrht® ara 3 faa

2)
3)
4)
5)

6)
0)
8)
9)

10)

11

12)
13)

14)

15)

16)

The spleen rules the four extremities. The four extemities are the four limbs.
The kidneys rule the joints.

Cold mostly leads to sinew contracture and bone pain.

Heat mostly leads to sinew slackening and bone wasting.

Damp sores, swelling and pain of hands and feet pertains to the spleen and
stomach.

Pain, itching, sores and ulceration pertain to the heart fire.

For diseases of hand and feet mostly treat spleen, stomach and kidney meridians.
If the hand large intestine mendian is diseased, there will be pain in shoulder and
front of the forearm, and pain & non use of the thumb and forefinger.

If the small intestine meridian is diseased, the shoulder will appear to be seized
and the forearm to be broken, there may be pain in little finger.

If the triple warmer meridian is diseased, there will be pain in the outer aspect of
the shoulder, forearm, elbow and upper arm and the little & ring finger will be non
functional.

It the pericardium meridian is diseased, the heart of hand (palm) will be hot, the
elbow and the upper arm will be contracted and tense, the armpit will be swollen.
If the lungs meridian is diseased, the inside front of the forearm and upper arm
will be painful and there will be heat in the centre of the palm.

If the heart meridian is diseased, the inside back of the forearm and the upper
arm will be painful and there will be heat and pain in the centre of the palm.

If there is pain and numbness in the hands and feet, the elbows and the knees
and if they can not be flexed or extended or move, this is due to wind cold attacking
and entering the meridians or due to blood & fluids being dry and withered.
Thus they are not able to nourish the four limbs.

Aching and pain in the hand may be due to disease in the large intestine meridian.
Treatment: Li4, 11,154

Hypertonicity & pain in finger may be due to disease in the lungs meridian.
Treatment: Lu 114

A Treatise on (34
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture- - Part 22 - Acupuncture Aches And Pains \

