Chapter

Rickets a afwana

Ricket is a disease of infants and children due to vitamin D and calcium deficiency,
marked by delay in walking, dentition and closure of the fontanalle, bending and distortion of
the bones, muscular pain and sweating of the head at night.

faci D vd diem st oat & aro a aren Regal vd seat wr vw en Fret gaa eR
BUM YW GUT @, aia 2x B Proed S aren were AS we UN &, eal yg aie Baik Gar
@ omit &, aidrat Fad aero cen wa BT aw wT aoe Bl ae Mn ater aera
(Ricket) aera @1

Ricket may be of two types :

i) _ Rickets due to deficiency of phosphates

ii) Rickets due to deficiency of Vitamin D

i) Rickets due to deficiency of phosphates (Hypophosphatemic Rickets) :

Itis also called Vitamin D resistant rickets. It is a disorder in which the bones become
painful soft and bend easily because the blood contains low level of phosphate and has
inadequate amounts of the active form of vitamin D.

This is a rare disorder and nearly always hereditary. The genetic defect causes a
kidney abnormality that allows a high amount of phosphate to be excreted into the urine. It
results in low levels of phosphate in the blood. Bones need phosphate to grow. Deficiency
of phosphate causes defective bones.

Females with hypophosphatonic rickets haves less severe bone disease than males.

In rare cases, the disorder develops as a result of certain cancers, such as giant cells
tumours of bones, sarcomas, prostate cancer and breast cancer.

Hypophosphatemic rickets is not the same as rickets caused by Vitamin D deficiency.
Main Symptoms 3a mart :

It usually begins in the first year of life.

It produces bowing of legs and other bone deformities, bone pain and a short stature.
Bone outgrowth where muscles attack to bones may limit movement at those points.
A baby skull bones may close too soon, leading to seizures.

Laboratory tests show that calcium levels in the blood are normal, but phosphate
levels are low.

136

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture- - Part 22 - Acupuncture Aches And Pains

