Treatment :

The aim of the treatment is to raise phosphate levels in the blood, which will promote
normal bone formation.

Phosphate can be taken by mouth and should be combined with calcitriol. Calcitriol is
the activated form of Vitamin D.

However allopathic treatment often leads to high level of calcium in the blood, the
accumulation of calcium in the blood tissue or kidney stones. This can harm the kidneys
and other tissues.

Hypophosphatemic rickets resulting from cancer improves dramatically after the cancer
is improved.

li) Rickets due to deficiency of Vitamin D deficiency :

Vitamin D exists in two forms that are important for nutrition.

i) Vitamin D 2is produced by plants and is consumed in the diet. The most common

food souce of Vitamin D 2 fortified foods, such as cereals and dairy products.
Vitamin D 2 is present in fish liver oils and fatty fish.

ii) Vitamin D 3 is formed in the skin when the skin is exposed to sunlight.

Vitamin D is stored in liver.

Vitamin D must be processed by the liver and kidney before it is converted to the active
form.

The active form promotes the absorption of calcium and phosphorus from the intestines
and thus is necessary for the formation and maintenance of bones.

In vitamin D deficiency, calcium and phosphate levels in the blood decrease because
vitamin D is necessary for absorption of these minerals. Vitamin D deficiency may result in
a bone disorder called rickets in children or osteomalacia in adults.

Vitamin D deficiency can be caused by lack of vitamin D in the diet or by inadequate
exposure to sunlight.

A pregnant women with vitamin D deficiency may develop osteomalacia and the new
born has a high risk of developing rickets. Because breast milk does not contain large
amounts of vitamin D, breastfed infants who are not exposed to enough sunlight may develop
rickets and usually required supplements.

Several rare hereditary forms of rickets develop because the body cannot metalbolise
vitamin D normally.

137 A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture- - Part 22 - Acupuncture Aches And Pains )

