e Joint pain and fever are the most common first symptoms. One or several joints
suddenly become painful and feel tender when touched. They may also be red,
hot and swollen and may contain fluid.

Ankles, knees, elbows and wrists are commonly affected.

As pain in one joint improves, pain in another joints starts (migratory pain). Joints
pain may be mild or severe and typically lasts for 2 to 4 weeks. Long term joint
damage from rheumatic fever does not develop.

e Sometimes, the children with heart inflammation have no symptoms and the
past inflammations is recognised years later when heart damage is discovered.
Some children feel their heart beating rapidly. Other have chest pain caused by
inflammation of the sac around the heart.

Heart failure may develop, causing the children to feel tired and short of breath with
nausea, vomiting, stomachache or a hacking cough. Heart inflammation disappear gradually
usually within 5 months. However, it may permanently damage the heart valves, resulting
in Rhumatic Heart Disease (RHD).

A flat painless rash with a wavy edge (erythema marginatum) may appear as the
other symptoms subside. it lasts for a short time, sometimes less than a day.

{n children with heart inflammation, small hard noduls may form under the skin.
The noduls are usually painless and disappear without treatment.

Jerky incontrolled movementes (sydenham's chorea) may begin gradually in children
with rheumatic fever, but only after all other symptoms have improved.

Amonth may go by before the movements become so intense that the child is taken to
a doctor. By then the child typically has rapid, purposeless, sporadic movements that
disappear during sleep.

The movements may involve any muscle except those of the eyes. Facial grimacing is
common.

In mild cases the child may seem clumsy and may have slight difficulty in dressing
and eating.

In extreme cases, the child may have to be protected from injuring himself with his
flailing arms or legs.

The chorea lasts between 4 to 8 months.

A Treatise on 104
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture- - Part 22 - Acupuncture Aches And Pains

