Principles of Electro Acupuncture

The meaning of excessive energy is ‘Itis’ like arthritis, spondylitis, stomatitis, glocytis
etc.

Scarcity of complete energy means ‘Ose’ or ‘Sis’ like paralysis, neurosis, vericose,
fibrosis, stasis etc.

Who has taken birth goes towards death gradually.

In Chinese Acupuncture whenever a gold needle is inserted in any point of the body,
that increases the energy there because gold needle attracts energy.

In Chinese Acupuncture whenever a silver needle is inserted in any point of the body,
energy disperses from there resulting in reduction of energy.

In Chinese Acupuncture treatment of energy is given on the guess basis. In Electro
Acupuncture to measure the actual energy of every point and every organ, an electronic
instrument named Dermatron is used. In this system treatmentis given on the basis
of original diagnosis rather than guess work. Treatment is also given by Electronic
Instrument. This saves the therapist from both the situations of giving treatment more
than required or less than required treatment.

In classical Chinese Acupuncture the energy available in the patient's body is used for
the balacing whereas in Electro Acupuncture the electronic energy can be given on
the desired area or on the desired organ and energy can also be increased in the
desired quantity.

Premonitions of diseases and Treatment : Body keeps producing homotoxins and
regularly expels them out of the body. Whenever these homotoxins remain in the body,
they give rise to diseases. When the homotoxins increase in the body, then the cells of
the body start degenerating and give rise to serious diseases. It is very important to
know the phase of the homotoxins in the body for the treatment and diagnosis purpose.
But it has been observed that diagnosis through clinical tests show the disease only in
the last phase only. But by that time disease become severe and incurable.

“Every illness expresses the effects of homotoxins, that is of substances produced by
the body itself”. — Dr. Reckweg

<)
