Kidney Meridian :

According to Chinese Acupuncture this meridian starts from K1 on the sole of the foot.
According to E. A. V. Kidney meridian starts from the inner side of the nail of the
smallest toe (v" toe) of the foot. From here it goes through Chinese K 1 inthe sole of
the foot. INE. A. V., the points on this meridian is also different till ankle. According to E.
A.V. Chinese Point K 1 is the deep Lymph of the Kidney.

The points of Urinary Bladder Meridian on lumbar and backof thigh are also different in
EBAY.

Tripple Warmer Meridian is known as Endocrine Meridian in E. A. V. Treatment for the
malfunctions of all endocrinal glands can be given on this meridian.

Pericardium Meridian is known as circulation meridian in E. A. V. All the points related
to the arteries and veins etc. of the circulatory system in the body are given oni this
meridian.

According to E. A. V. Spleen Meridianis only on the left side. This meridian is used for
the treatment of the chemistry of blood. Important points related to the white blood
cells, lymphocytes etc. in blood are described on this meridian.

In E.A. V., the right side of spleen meridian is called Pancreas Meridian. Diabetes,
gout, fat, metabolism, albumin etc. are treated on this meridian.

Eye Orbit Meridian is used for the treatment of various parts of eyes like Retina, Macula,
Comea, Sclera, Choroid, Vitreous body, Ciliary body, Iris, tear gland, conjunctiva etc.
Allthe three cranial motor nerves of eyes (Trochlear Nerve, Oculomotor Nerve and
Abducens Nerve) can be treated on this meridian.

Dr. R. Vollhas prepared various treatment protocols for the various diseases of eye by
Electro Acupuncture. With the help of these treatment protocols, treatment of the
irretrievable diseases of eye is also possible.

According to Dr. Voll, disease in any part of eye shows the malfunction in the organ of
the body. Therefore, at the time of treating eye one must treat the related internal organ
also for example, if vision impairment happens due to yellow spot in macula, thenitis
the resultant of low absorption of oxygen in lungs. The person inherits the right lung

<>)
