intestine and large intestine is successfully possible with the serous membrane
coating points discovered by Dr. R. Voll. Excess or reduced serous coat results
in peritonitis or Adhesion respectively. Organ becomes painful in both the types
of cases. (Peritonitis and Adhesion) Serous Membrane coating point is the
treatment for both types of cases.

A. |. P (Autonomic Innervation Point)

In organ's meridian there is an autonomic innervation ponit which connects the
organ to the spinal cord and gets the continuous nutrition and instructions for the
autonomic function from brain through spinal cord. It is also called as autonomic
steering point. Treatment on this point treats autonomic plexus of the related
organs and helps in restoring the synchronisation between the organ and brain
and spinal cord. This point indicates the fault in the autonomic steering of an
organ and this is the point for treatment also.

Brain is a computerised power station. Spinal cord functions like main transformer.
Plexus of every organ or the innervation pointis like a local transformer. When
the transformer of the localised colony is weak, the voltage of electricity reduces
in the houses of the colony and light becomes dim. In this, if we rectify the
transformer of the colony, it restores the voltage of electricity results in full light. In
the same way each organ in our body is also connected with one or more than
one plexuses. If there is any problem in any plexus, the energy supply to the
related organ reduces and instructions from the brain also start missing. This all
results in reduced working capacity of the organ and the person becomes the
patient of that organ's disease. For example - plexuses to Heart are as follows :

e Cardiac Plexus
e Coronary Plexus
e Cardiac Ganglia

In the case of heart disease treatment for the functionality of all the three plexuses
results in the inhancement of function and working capacity of heart. At the time
of surgical operation of these plexuses of body, anaesthesia is given to numb the
