a) Red points on the root with yellow coating indicates heat in either urinary
bladder or intestines.
b) Red points on the root without coating indicates kidney yin deficiency
causing empty heat in heart.
2i) Red tongue with red spots ct ‘after aX cnet ered ett :

i) Spots are larger than points. eret fargsit @ a3 ele 21

ii) Spots indicate heat with blood stasis. eet WT & we wp St Warae sant ZI

iii) Dark red or black spots indicate a greater degree of heat than in the case of red
spots. Tet Tic OT Bry eet SAAT Heat set Tete el

iv) Purple spots indicate a great degree of blood stasis than in the case of red
spots. dart tat ww St Borde al sae Bl

v) Red spots on the tip of the tongue indicates presence of Heat & Blood Stasis in
heart. sf af tip WX cet cel at a a Heart 4 Heat Ud Blood at warde sare él

vi) Red spots on the sides of the tongue indicates Heat and Blood Stasis in liver.
aint & fear o cnet ered Liver F Heat vd we Bt warac sara Bi

vii) | Red spots on the root of the tongue indicate the biood stasis in urinary bladder,
intestines or womb. si a SIS OR Cet Get A at A Urinary bladder, sii a
auf 4 up at BaraT sat Zl

vill) There is difference in symptoms produced by red points and symptoms pro-
duced by red spots.
In red spots there will be heat as well as blooc stasis. This will cause more
intense & fixed pain, which is persistent and boring or stabbing in nature.

If urinary bladder is involved there is intense pain during urination. If the intestines
are involved there will be stabbing lower abdominal pain. If the womb is involved
there will be painful periods with stabbing & severe pain. The pain will be more
severe before the periods and slightly relieved after start of period.

2j) Red points in external diseases aved) tril # sity ox cnet frg SFT =

oa The first one third part of the tongue ie the front part corresponds to the top of
the body ie the upper warmer. It also corresponds with the external part of the
body.

Os The middle one third part of the tongue ie the middle part corresponds to the
middle warmer.

a The last one third part ie the root of the tongue corresponds to the lower warmer.
