i) A thin white wet coat in the front part of the tongue may indicate that the external
wind cold is attacking the upper warmer. 37 & WHA & WMT A vaeit Wha a
@, at a Attack of external wind cold on upper warmer sarat 21

ii) If the patient has a blood deficiency or a yang deficiency, he will have pale
tongue. If such person is attacked by external pathogenic heat, there will be red
points on the pale tongue.

If this external pathogenic heat is not expelled, the tongue colour will change
from pale to red.

iii) Red points on the front part of the tonge indicates an attack of external patho-
genic heat in first stage affecting only the upper warmer tet ait pharyngitis Te
BIN Ware, SAUYRTST Ur SUN va oe ase F rae fees ht el Teh at ater
Wl OS cre a Shy & ss TF ASH wd SI FH HARM H ITU BT
aa él

iv) Red points extending towards the centre of the tongue indicates that the exter-
nal attack of heat has entered in the internal part of the body. At this stage. This
is more dangerous & difficult to expel.

v) Red points either on the right or left side of the tongue indicates that the external
attack of pathogenic heat is half interior and half exterior. The tongue has a
white slippery coat on the right side alone. @i at cud vd sax ay corn &
Bae Ter aera B fas Vr AR Se SRN TH HAR HT YT a! FA aT HH & Fe
I Wa Hea et omer @, efter glk, GUI Ten, hypochondriac pain sme et sid ei
$aa Tar Tete & fos BH lesser yang type (Triple warmer and gall bladder merid-
ians) aw 31 7 Bl STAR UA: s4 Zt meridians & fargsil ay sedate Hx fear
ama @1
J pattern HRN seat B at sre f Aw! SHAK GH TT infection a sore throat e
aie

vi) Red points on one or both sides of the tongue are also frequently seen in children's
diseases involving rashes, chicken pox and measles.

2k) Pale red or white points on tongue sitw ox ha cnet a wtba farg Gre :

i) Pale red points on the middle part of the tongue indicates slight heat in stom-
ach, but with deficiency of spleen and stomach Qi.

ii) White points on the middle part of the tongue indicates cold in stomach.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 18

