of Qi &
annels

ily one
id poor

spleen,

either
i

_ lungs
). Ifthe

7)

7)

8)

Swollen between tip and centre of the tongue :

shy & ale ed Oa & dt Gr er:

A tongue with swelling between tip and centre (corresponding to lungs area on tongue)
indicates lungs Qi deficiency with retention of damp phlegm in lungs.

Treat lungs Qi deficiency & spleen Qi deficiency both.

fort aba or Br seer Arar A ery Preseren Wear S TAS Shy Sa VOR at at ward 21
Swollen along a central crack sitw & aeq amt 4 crack & act 4 Yr aT :

A tongue may have a crack in the centre extending to the tip, on sities * 2~9y yo! anes
there is swelling.
On red tongue such swelling indicates, the presence of heart fire.
On normal tongue such swelling indicates heart Qi deficiency.
It indicates that the heart is dilated in both these cases due to severe overwor
Photo 17
9) Swollen half of the tongue smeft sft Yoit at:

When only one half the longitudinal tongue is swollen, it indicates deficiency
blood in that side of the body. This is due to progressive malnourishment of ch
from stomach & spleen deficiency. This is a mild form of atrophy affecting or
side of the body. There will be numbness, feeling of pin & needles, weakness ar
grip in one side of the body.
Tone yang brightness channels (Stomach & large intestine channles) and :
thereby tonifying the Qi & blood of the channels.

Photo 18

10) Localised swelling on one side of the tongue :

sth & we cen Cas era OF ote Ff Gore eT:
A tongue that has a partial swelling in a specific area on one side indicates
a deficiency or stagnation of Qi in the organ corresponding to the swollen arec
If the colour of the tongue is normal, this swelling indicates deficiency of Qi.
If the colour of the tongue is red, this swelling indicates stagnation of Qi.
Normally such localised swelling on one side of tongue occurs in the chest é
area on the tongue. If the tongue colour is normal it indicates lungs Qi deficienc:
tongue colour is red, it indicates stagnation of liver Qi in chest.

Photo 19

( A-Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 18

