Chapter

Tongue diagnosis in children

weal ar ste an We fer

1)

2)

3)

4)

6)

7)

If a child suddenly develops a redness on the sides and / or front of the tongue or as
red points on tongue, this is a very reliable indication of attack of external wind heat.

Itis important to note that redness and / or red points on the sides and / or front of the
tongue actually appear before the onset of the symptoms. These tongue symptoms
are absolutely reliable.

If these tongue symptoms have appeared, the child can be treated by expelling the
wind and releasing the exterior.

In lung heat the tongue may be red with red points in the front part of the tongue
extending towards the centre.

In lung phlegm heat the whole tongue is red with sticky yellow coating in the front part
of the tongue extending toward the centre.

In dampness, the tongue has a sticky wet coating and may have white vesicles.

Children are frequently given antibiotics during acute febrile diseases. Antibiotics cause
the coating of the tongue to fall off or to become thinner in patches. The tongue be-
comes partially peeled. This indicates stomach yin deficiency.

Some children have hereditary geographic tongue. This is a tongue that is peeled in
patches with the peeled pathces having quite defined white borders.

This indicates constitutional stomach yin deficiency.

This geographic tongue is often seen in children's allergic diseases as allergic asthama
and allergic atopic eczema. In both the cases stomach yin deficiency should be treated.
Many children often have red points all over the tongue.

a) In acute cases red points all over the tongue are due to heat in lungs.

b) In chronic cases red points all over the tongue are due to heat in stomach and
intestines.

c) Red points on sides of the tongue are due to liver fire.
d) Red points on the edges of the tongue are due to stomach fire.
e) Red points on the tip of the tongue are due to heart fire.

f) Red points on the root of the tongue are due to humid heat in urinary bladder or
intestines.

A Treatise on 429
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 18

