Attack of external humidity produces start of multiple sclerosis.

Humidity initially attack the legs.

After this the humidity goes upwards and ultimately if may cause multiple sclerosis.

Living in humid places, humid houses, swimming, wet clothes causes attack of external
humidity which in turn causes multiple sclerosis.

Cold damp attacks the spleen and causes chronic nephritis, Treatment is given by
toning the yang and sedating the diuretic points.

Hot damp attacks the spleen and causes chronic nephritis. Treatment is given by
sedating the points causing heat, and by sedating points related to diuretics. Chronic nephritis.
@ 3gak dene agex feat sre @! dena aga H Dampness and edema Pract sit @!

The dampness turns into phlegm in the long run.

Humid heat fire causes erysipelas of the lower limbs with swelling of the local lymph
nodes.

Humid heat fire causes elephantitis, cellulitis of legs, filarial attack of leg.

When the humid heat in urinary bladder has been transmitted from liver fire, it causes
humid heat in head causing otitis media.

Heart fire goes to the urinary bladder via small intestine and causes painful urination
syndrome along with mouth ulcer.

Cystitis is caused by heart heat going upto urinary bladder via small intestine.
If the spigastric pain is with a feeling of fullness, it is due to humidity.
Epigastric pain with thirst without a desire to drink, it indicates humid heat.
Following are the patterns of diseases caused by dampness :

1) Spleen Qi deficiency causes accumulation dampness with nausea, stiffness of
chest and epigastrium and a feeling of heaviness.

2) Spleen Yang deficiency causes dampness with chilliness, cold limbs and
tiredness.

3) Cold damp attacks the spleen and causes sweetish taste or absence of taste
and heaviness in head and chest in cold damp weather or living conditions.

4) Damp heat attacks the spleen and causes loose offensive, stool and nausea and
vomiting, abdominal pain and low grade fever. (It includes food infection and food
poisoning).

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 24 - Bilingual

