Chapter

Diagnostic Inspection of Nose ae t@at 1 fen ae

Nose corresponds to Lungs meridian by means of the partner meridian of Large
intestines. It also connects with stomach meridian.

1) Ifthe tip of the nose is green or blue, it indicates abdominal pain.

2) __ If the tip of the nose is yellow, it indicates humid heat.

3) If the tip of the nose is white in colour, it indicates blood deficiency.

4) If the tip of the nose is red, it indicates heat in Lungs or deficiency of spleen.

5) If the tip of the nose is grey, it indicates an impairment of the movement of water.

6) If the tip of the nose is dark with blackish tint, it indicates predominance of the
energies of the Kidney meridian.

7) Ifthe nose is slightly moist and shiny, it indicates that the disease is no serious.
8) If the nostril is dry, it indicates heat in the stomach or large intestine.

9) If the nose is dry and black, it indicates presence of fire poison.

10) Aclean watery discharge from the nose, indicates an external wind cold pattern.
11) A thick yellow discharge from the nose indicates an external wind heat pattern.

12) Flaring of the nostrils in a person with high fever indicates extreme heat in the
Lungs.

13) Asunkenin, collapsed, shrivelled nose, indicates deficiency of the large intestine
and stomach meridian.

14) A puffed or swollen nose, indicates excess type of disharmony in the large intestine
and stomach meridians.

15) Nostril moving with respiration during initial stage of an illness indicates wind
heat or fire blocking the Lungs meridian.

16) If the immediate surroundings of the Nostrils look as if blackened by soot, it
indicates heat in large intestine and stomach meridians.

17) Ifthe immediate surroundings of the cold and runny Nostrils look as if blackened
by soot, it indicates extreme coldness due to excess of Yin.

18) Nosetril moving with respiration after prolonged illness and is accompanied by
perspiration, it points to the imminent depletion of the energies of the Lungs meridian.

Q00

A Treatise on 33
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 24 - Bilingual

