4)
5)
6)

ait & apf (Tongue shape) —_Long, short, cracks, #él gael si
shy ot Wa (Tongue coating) Yellow, white sticky coating slippery coating
sity at at (Tongue moisture) Dry, wet, drooling

What prompted me to Write a book on Tongue Diagnosis?

Patient with emotional problems often came for Acupressure Treatment. | felt difficulty
in diagnosing the root cause of their emotional and mental problems. Tongue diagnosis
helped me in the following cases :

1)

2)

3)

A patient used to beat his wife on filmsy grounds. He came to me for treatment
along with his wife. | was at a loss asto what treatment be given to such prople.

| examined his tongue. His tongue was red, the tip of the tongue was redder.
There were red rimmed ulcers on the lip of the tongue. All these symptoms
indicate Heart Fire Blazing. | gave him treatment for heart fire blazing. After three
days of treatment, the patient stoppd beating his wife. After fiteen days of
treatment, he was cured fully.

A patient used to quarrel with his family members, neighbours and collegues in
his office. He got annoyed and became angry all the time. He came to me for
treatment.

“gruesunis wngue wei eum jeu'uivers. 1i was a case of Liver Fire blazing.
A treatment for fifteen days worked miracles and his anger was no more there.
A patient aged 38 years suffered from manic depression. He suffered from
mania and madness for fifteen days and the next fifteen days he had extreme
depression.

His whole tongue was red. There was thick yellow coat on his tongue. He had a
vertical crack on the middle part of his tongue. His tip of the tongue was redder
and swollen. It was a case of phlegm fire harassing the heart. When the fire was
dominant, he had mania and madness for fifteen days and when the phlegm
was dominant he had extreme depression for 15 days.

This treatment cured him fully.

A patient had chronic schizophrenia with hallucinations for the last twelve years
Tip of his tongue was redder with ulcer, the sides his tongue were redder with

ulcer. This was a case of heart fire blazzing with liver fire blazzing with phlegm
fire in the stomach.

A Treatise on 49
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 24 - Bilingual

