P6,Sp4l: These two points together opens the penetrating vessel, when there
is excess in stomach with stagnation of food in the epigastrium
causing fullness and distension & rebillious stomach Qi 31d: 31@
GWOT ST HOM STAT F St SSS XS TT ea amt SiR waned 4
Bt cen Hera FAR, Tara Ud aH a AP 6 Led Spa lars
ator oe va 4 amt at six ag one & cen eR Ud aATa Aco

Se et are a!
St 201 It resolves the food accumulation & relieves fullness.
st21d It is the door of the stomach. It descends the food. It resolves food

accumulation. It is suitable in stomach excess conditions. It stops
epigastric pain effectively.

st25) It is the front shu point of large intestine. It promotes bowel
movement and hence, resolves retention of food.

St44,451: These are distal points. Sedation of these two points stop epigastric
pain due to excess in stomach with obstructions & rebellious Qi.

cv 134 It subdues rebellious Qi and relieves belching, sour regurgitation,
nausea & vomiting.

cv 104 It augments descention of stomach Qi.

Special Notes :

If the retention of food is not cured within a short time by above treatment, advise the
patient to fast for a few days. Even if the retention of food is relieved, the patient should
by advised to reduce the food intakes and should eat easily digestable foods.

The therapists should know that there can be mixed deficiency excess symptoms
also. On one side there may be spleen Qi deficiency causing poor appetite, mild
epigastric pain, bleeding in between periods (spleen not controlling blood), On the
other side there can be excess condition due to retention of food producting constipation,
nausea, epigastric pain which is worse on pressure & on lying down. In this case tone
spleen Qi by toning St 36, Sp 6, 3, UB 20, 21, CV 12. Sedate the excess by sedating
CV 11, St 21, 40, P 6. These two treatments will take care of both deficiency & excess
conditions. Hence, the therapists have to prepare their own treatment protocols
according to various symptom of the patients.

A Treatise on (103
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 24 - Bilingual

