In men, the front position shoule be very slightly stronger, while in women the rear
position should be so. This also follows the Yin-Yang symbolism according to which upper
is Yang (hence male) and lower is Yin (hence female).

Occupation :

The pulse of those who are engaged in heavy physical work should be stronger than
those who are engaged in mental work.

The Normal Pulse :

The pulse should have three qualities which are described as having Stomach-Qi,
having spirit and having a root.

Stomach Qi:

A pulse is said to have Stomach Qi, when it feels “gentle”, “calm” and is relatively
slow (4 beats per respiratory cycle).

A pulse with Stomach Qi is not rough. The stomach is the sea of food, the root of the
Post-heaven Qi and the origin of Qi and blood. For this reason, it gives “body” to the pulse.
If the pulse feels too rough or hard, it indicates that the Stomach function is impaired. The
“Simple Questions” chapter says : “The Stomach is the Root of the 5 Yin organs; the Qi of
the Yin organs cannot reach the Lung channel (i.e. the radial artery on the Lung channel) by
itself but it needs Stomach-Ci.... if the pulse is soft it indicates that it has Stomach-Qi and
the prognosis is good”.

This particular quality of being “soft” (but not too soft), “gentle”, “calm” and
“not rough” is important ; beginners often take a rough and hard quality of the pulse as
being “healthy”.

Spirit :

The pulse is said to have spirit when it is soft but with strength, neither big or small and
regular. It should also be regular in its quality, i.e. it should not change quality very easily
and frequently. A pulse that has these qualities reflects a good state of Heart Qi and Blood.

Root :

A pulse is said to have root in two different senses. It has a root when the deep level
can be felt clearly, and also when the rear position can be felt clearly. | having a root
indicates that the Kidneys are healthy and strong.

Thus a pulse that has spirit, stomach Qi and root indicates a good state of the Mind, Qi
and essence respectively.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 24 - Bilingual

