Chapter

Palpating Points frgat at garat te

Meridian and points diagnosis objective or subjective reactions appearing at certain
points. Generally speaking, any points can be used in diagnosis, following the general

principles
diagnosis:

outlined for the meridians. However, certain points are particularly useful in

; these are the back transporting points, the front collecting points, the Lower-Sea

points and Ah Shi points.

1)

3)
4)

5)

6)

7)

8)

The back transporting points are the places where the Qi and blood of a particular
organ “infuses” : they are directly related to their respective organ and very often
manifest certain reactions when the organ is diseased.

As a general principle, any sharp pain (either spontaneous or on pressure) on
these points indicates a full condition of the relevant organ.

A dull soreness (either spontaneous or on pressure) indicates an empty condition.

Each back transporting point can reflect the condition of its relevant organ, e.g.
St-21 for the Stomach, etc. In addition, UB 37 reflects the state of the Lungs,
UB 47 is often sore in Kidney-diseases and UB 31, UB 32, UB 33 and UB 34
reflect the state of the reproductive system particularly in women.

The front collecting points are particularly reactive to pathological changes of the
internal organs and are useful for diagnostic purposes. Each front collecting point
teflects the state of an internal organ and a list is given.

The Lower-Sea points are also useful in diagnosing stomach or intestinal
diseases; St 36 for the stomach, St 37 for the Large Intestine and St 39 for the
Small intestine.

In addition, there is a special point between St 36 and St 37 which reflects the
state of the appendix. Its location is variable and is situated wherever there is a
soreness in between those two points. If this special point (called “Lanweixue”
meaning “Appendix Point”) is painful on pressure, it indicates inflammation of the
appendix. If the appendix is healthy, there will be no reaction at this point.
Finally, Ah Shi points can be used for diagnosis. The theory of Ah Shi points was
developed by Sun Si Miao (581-682) during the Tang dynasty. he said very
simply that wherever there is soreness on pressure (whether on a channel or
not), there is a point. This is obviously because the channel network is so dense
that every area of the body is irrigated by a channel. As we have already seen,
dull soreness on pressure indicates an empty addition of the channel influencing
that area, while a sharp pain on pressure indicates a full condition of the channel.

Qo00

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 24 - Bilingual

