v) When the Liver Qi stagnation attacks the intestine, there is borborygmus.
vi) When the stagnated Liver Qi attacks the spleen, there is diarrhea.

vil) When the stagnated Liver Qi attacks the throat, the patient has a feeling of lump
in throat. This feeling of lump in throat comes and goes according to emotional

state.

vii) When the stagnated Liver Qi attacks the uterus, it impairs the movement of blood
in Ren Mo and Chong Mo. It results in irregular and painful periods and
premenstrual tension with distension of the breast. Breasts are under the influence
of the Liver.

ix) The therapists should know that the depression due to Liver Qi stagnation is
periodic with physical symptoms as mentioned above. When the physical
symptoms go away, the depression also goes away.

This pattern is of excess type. In case of Heart fire there is depression which may
appear to be deficient. In case of Liver Qi stagnation the persion is depressed, moody and
quiet. These symptoms may appear to be deficient, it is caused by stagnation of Liver Qias
such it is to be treated as an excess pattern.

In Liver Qi stagnation the mental symptoms fluctuate. The patient goes through periods
of depression when all the physical symptoms also appear. The periods when the depression
is lifted, the physical symptoms disappear.

Treatment :
Pél

Tw6s
GB34l :

Liv3l) :
Liv13) :

Liv14) :

P 6, Tw6, GB 34, Liv 3, 13, 14 (L&R) Vall

“This point is indicated when the stagnation of Liver Qi is caused by

emotinoal problems. It regulates Liver Qi. The Liver is the mother of
pericardium in terminal yin. When the son is sedated the mother
automatically gets sedated.

it regulates Liver Qi and it particularly affects the sides of the body.

It regulates Liver Qi and it particularly influences the hypochondriac
region.

It regulates Liver Qi and it particularly affects the throat.

It affects the Liver Qi in the middle warmer, particularly when it attacks
the Spleen.

[tregulates the Liver Qi in the middle warmer, particularly when it affects
the Stomach.

A treatment for a month cured all the problems.

Q00

146

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part - 23 Bilingual

