Diagnosis :

i)

iii)

Chronic Condition :

Itis a case of severe kidney yang deficiency propensity to catching cold is due to
kidney yang deficiency. Dry tongue is also due to deficiency of yang Qi unable to
transport fluids to it. The tongue is purple as the deficiency of kidney yang has
caused internal cold and this internal cold has caused stasis of blood. Hence, the
tongue is purple.

Acute External Attack :

This was an attack of external wind humid heat. The temperature 101°F and
headaches are due to attack of wind heat. Feeling of heaviness, bodyaches,
buzzing in ears and giddiness are due to attack of humidity.

All these conditions have been caused by an attack of external wind humid heat.
Sequelae :

These are caused by the external pathogens entering the interior.

The heat and humidity have entered the interior body. It has caused constant low
grade fever. The heat and humidity in the interior disturb the circulation of Qi and
blood with pre exisiting condition of kidney yang deficiency, the heat and humidity
cause rising of liver wind producing nystagmus, lack of balance and coordination.
These are caused by interior wind caused by the deficiency of blood and kidney
yang.

The humidity has entered the interior body causing constant low grade fever,
numbness, extreme tiredness, a feeding of heaviness and lethargy.

Treatment Principles :

i)

ii)

The patient came at the sequelae stage when the condition became interior one.
There was extreme deficiency of upright Qi and the presence of the formerly
external pathogenic factors (humid heat), now became internal (humid heat).

The external attack has also caused internal pathogenic factor i.e., liver wind.
Here, the manifestation has become primary, as it has caused symptoms which
require urgent treatment. The manifestations in this case are of two types :

a) Humid heat in interior causing constant low grade fever.

b) _ Internal Liver wind has caused nystagmus (Aa tire or artftge dered Yea),
lack of balance and coordination

Both these, particularly the liver wind need to be treated without delay.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part - 23 Bilingual

