Chapter-1
Ayurvedic Acupressure-Introduction

As self depicted, the two words Ayurveda and Acupressure combine to form
Ayurvedic Acupressure. The word Ayurveda originates from the Sanskrit word ‘Ayush’
meaning life and ‘veda' meaning knowledge. The word ‘veda itself in Sanskrit is derived
from ‘vid' & suffix ‘ghan‘ [ vid+ghan=veda ] meaning knowledge. Veda is word of God;eternal
voice of Devatas.Veda is a compilation of mantras uttered by God and with time Rishis &
Munis compiled them into Scriptures and established them as eternal truth-Being God's
own words. Vedas are for the entire humanity; are perpetual & most powerful.To call them
of Indian origin is to lower their grandeur. At the most their compilation can be called as
having been done on Indian soil. Ayurveda is also called the fifth veda, after Rigveda,
Yajurveda, Samveda & Atharvaveda.

Even though Acupressure & Ayurveda are based on common principles but there are
certain differences which have been explained in detail in this book. Both the therapies are
spiritual, perpetual, physical & metaphysical and have oceans of power. Synthesis of the
principles of the two therapies and the practical application of treatment by Acupuncture
will make its horizon and base widespread indeed. Both therapies, in themselves, are
very effective. But for a common man , to appreciate how powerful their synthesis will be is
highly impossible. To utilize Ayurveda‘s principles in treatment by Acupressure has made
it feasible to control serious diseases like leucoderma, leprosy, tuberculosis, arthritis etc.
Thus Ayurvedais a life science which teaches us the art of living. This is such a knowledge
of treatment which shows healthy or sick and balanced or imbalanced status of living
beings. How we balance life naturally is the fundamental purpose of Ayurveda. This is
based on a balanced food [aahar], thoughts [ vichar ], living [vihar ] & sleep [nidra}.

Vedas are the oldest repository of knowledge and are the source of science and arts.
In fact veda‘s are God's own spiritual knowledge that later on Rishis and munis brought
about into writing.

1) Background of Ayurvedic Origin

For diagnosis and treatment of diseases that disrupt human wellbeing, maharishis
assembled in the white abode of Himalayas & discussed how to save humanity;then to
obtain complete knowledge about methodologies to cure diseases, deputed maharishi
Bharadwaj as their representative to Lord Indra.After obtaining this knowledge, Maharishi
Bharadwaj returned to earth and transferred it properly to other Rishis. Then this knowledge
was passed on to their Shishyas[students] and so on. Thus this knowledge became an
unbroken tradition. This detailed description is depicted through the shlokas mentioned in
Charak Samhita (brahmanand tripathi).

(<7)
