1) Vata dosha:

Whole body is the activity area of doshas/humours. Their activities are continuously
moving in the body. In this state, places where the specific activities of these forces appear
in the body, those places of forces are called as specific place. The places of vaata are
urinary bladder, large intestine, pelvic region, shoulders, legs and bones etc.

vat af eat’- Vaayu speaks through movement. There are three meanings of
movement (speed) — knowledge, transmission and achievement. Creator of motion,
knowledge and receiving in the body is called as vaata. Vaayu present in nature adopts
the entire world by movement, ignites the fire, maintains continuous movement of sun,
moon, satellite and planets and manages the natural functions such as creation of clouds,
sprouting of seeds etc. By the name vaata, we know that each type of actions and
movements inside the body, presence of things where they are needed, creation of
knowledge by the sense-organs by receiving their corresponding subjects all these activities
are conducted by vaata. All the activities happening inside the body are due to vaata. It is
the bio-energy (praana) of all living being. Its imbalance creates disease.

Common attributes of Vata:

wan eftat org Yaraciise feera: we! faatknpltatatec: waren |
(Shlok-59, Pg.-32 (H))

Symptoms of vata- Dry, cold, light, subtle, mobile, transparent and rough are the
seven properties of vayu. The attributes opposite to these are used to reduce / diminish
vayu and its effects.

These are the attributes of vata. Food, environment and thought of this type increases
the attributes while food, environment and thought of opposite type decrease the attributes
of vaata in the body. On the basis of these attributes, identification, diagnosis and treatment
of a disease are possible.

Dry cold light subtle mobile | transparent properties of vata

Smooth hot heavy gross stable turbid opposite properties

ARNE Tessa: Ter: aeORETA GF: Raenpewrceyg fescue
axtkiot aenfady arqrascaray sentenced |

(Shlok-7, Pg.-254 (H))
The elements and/or activities which destroy vayu, make the element-dry, light, cold,
rough, transparent and porous. With these properties, the vayu in the body , having residence

