and swelling in the body? why has heart beat increased/reduced? Why is
lack of happiness in mind? Why due to lack of happiness the patient is in
deep sadness? And if there are so many symptoms then to go to whom?
Sometimes patient goes to a cardiologist, to a psychiatrist, to a nephrologist
or to a general physician. The fact is that due to lack of collective
consideration, can one assess the condition of patient easily in the form
of a single being? The answer and solution to this is the origin of all
therapies, proven by divine power and ocean of divine power, the
Ayurveda, in which collective consideration of all organs, sub-organs,
tissues, sense-organs, action-organs, emotional and mental ailments of
the body and many other diseases/treatment is possible, all at just one
place/type/medicine/method(unity in diversity). From one to infinity and
from infinity to one, by the help of this knowledge, that of body and universe
is feasible. In brief, in Ayurveda togetherness, collectiveness, relationship
and diversity are the main concepts of collective thinking.

“Everything can exist in isolation but always flourish in conjugation.”
This fact brings to light several facts; each element, each energy, sense
and action organs, either mind or soul, each one has a specific subject/
role to play. But when the act is not related properly to the organ, then
imbalance in that organ takes place. For example, the specific act of eyes
is to see; this is true- one object can be seen for longer period and another
for shorter period of time, e.g. flowers and idols of god and goddess can
be seen for longer period of time but dead body can't. This precisely is
imbalanced-subject. Here with one example, each element, energy, all
attributes, functions have been identified and decided. For all this, within
the limits of their subjective subject is a balanced organ functioning, else
all is imbalanced. And imbalance is the cause of the disease. The cure of
a disease is to achieve a balanced state. How to obtain a balance in
elements, energies, sense-organs, mind and soul are a unique subject
and the results are multi-dimensional. Indian rishis(researchers) had
thousands of years ago, by their divine foresight assessed that non-
imaginable diseases will appear whose cure will not be possible, but
Ayurveda is the most appropriate mode of treatment for infinite diseases
of nowadays (Kaliyug). Such diseases are dreaded and ready to attack.
And the human being feels helpless in front of them.Nowhere is he able to
find comprehensive relief. On one hand, the cure of newly appearing even
incurable diseases is possible by the vision of Ayurveda that on the other
