hand, Chinese philosopher’s Acupuncture treatment therapy directs and
shows the path of stimulating or activating the energy of body. Both these
philosophical divine knowledges has made it possible to cure literally all
kinds of incurable diseases.

Hence the meaning of Asatmya indriyarth sanyog is that it is necessary
that the senses are working in conscious control of atma(soul) and this is
a causative factor (hetu sutra) for the origin and cure of diseases. The
term (a=not; sa=together; atmya=with atma/soul; indriyarth=meaning/
function of indriyas/senses; sanyog=combination) itself indicates a break
up state and causes illnesses. It means that our consciousness is not
with our indriyas. For example-eating food while watching television (note-
the function of tongue, eyes, ears are different); hence this act creates
imbalance in mind giving rise to mental disorders. (as 2-3 indriyas cannot
be consciously combined with mann or atma at the same moment).
Similarly, while reading, if one starts thinking something else, it is another
example. This is an important cause of illness (under hetu sutra).

iii) Function (Karma) — The third sub-rule of causes is function. This implies
that daily eating of food, exercise and lifestyle affects a person’s health.
In daily routine, eating produces plasma (rasa) which nourishes all the
tissues.It is the food nutrients that create plasma, blood, skin, adipose
tissue, bone, bone marrow and semen; and this is responsible for post-
natal energy. Actually, nutrients of food are a part of productive cycle of
the body. Any obstruction in the production of these food nutrients leads
to diseases which will be discussed in the later chapters of this book.
Pragya-apraadh (Intellectual crime) —- Mind has two parts — external
mind and internal mind. The external mind is known by the five sense
organs and the internal mind as per physiology is brain; which again is
divided into several parts like cortical brain, limbic system, thalamus,
hypothalamus, midbrain, hindbrain, medulla, spinal cord, etc. The integration
of all these is actually brain. Their main function in the body is to ensure
balance to keep the memory intact, to ensure thinking, contemplation,
imagination, creativity, intelligence, etc. Thus, when there is loss of
intelligence, memory or balance (and this negligence or loss may be due
to external mind or internal mind), it seriously affects the strength of the
body and its ability to balance and bear. If the intelligence is lost or memory
is reduced/lost, righteousness is upset, all these are termed as pragya-
apraadh. And due to pragya-apraadh whatever changes takes place,

Gd
