fire. It dries the doshas/illnesses. It helps in excretion of wastes. It pervades in gross and
subtle objects. It develops the embryo in the womb. In a balanced state, vayu helps in
maintaining and prolongs life.

(1)
(2)
(3)

(4)
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

(12)

(13)

Tantrayantra dhaarnam- Vaata adopts the body which is like a machine, i.e., it
initiates the different tissues to do their own regular work in the body.
Naanaavidhcheshtaa pravertanamm.- It activates the voluntary and involuntary
activity of the body.

Niyantaa pranetaa cha manasah- Vaata promotes and regulates the mind. It
activates the mind in loving subject (hobby). When soul, mind, sense-organs
and their subject coordinates, only at that time intellect originates. Thinking of
subject, determination or decision making and feeling of happiness and sadness
all are due to the coordination of mind and soul. The duty of vaata is to provoke
mind to get rid of bad deeds and turn towards good deeds.

Sarvendriya preranam- Vaata promotes all sense-organs in their subject.
Servendriaarthaabhivahan- Vaata circulates the subjects of all sense-organs.
Five sense-organs are eyes, ears, nose, tongue and skin. Their subjects are to
see, hear, smell, taste and touch. The knowledge of their subjects is possible
due to vaata. Similarly, function of action organs such as speech, activities of
arms and legs, defecation, creation of self being by intercourse are done only
by vaata.

Vaata establishes all the tissues of the body in their own places. Prolapses of
different organs from their respective positions are only due to vaata- for example
uterus, rectum and intestines get prolapsed.

Sharir sandhaanam- Vaata coordinates the body. It performs the function of
co-ordinating the different body organs or parts in their own capacity at their
own places.

Vaak pravertanam- It promotes the speech.

Harshotsaahjananam- Happiness and zeal is due to vaata.

Agni sandhukshanam:- It stimulates the function of fire.

Sharir kled sanshoshanam- It destroys the imbalances like dampness present
in the body.

Malkshepanam- It removes the wastes created in body. Commonly paralysis
is due to imbalance in vaata. In kapha cases, excretion of stool and urine gets
obstructed and catheter is used for excretion in patient.

Sthoolaanu shroto bhedanam- It penetrates the small and big meridians.
