vi) Spiral Meridians :

The result of each elements physical and chemical configuration and separation, relates
to that elements molecule’s DNA structure. Hence, all these tissues who have genesis
and degensis can be treated by spiral meridians. In spiral meridian, by vertical and horizontal
meridians, related genesis and degensis are incorporated. Therefore, being result oriented
meridians, irrespective whether the ailment's beginning is hereditary or since birth or related
to hormones, tissues etc. all ailments diagnosis and treatment is feasible, by spiral meridians
and this has been found very effective. Briefly, both for the beginning and in acute condition,
for both spiral meridians is very effective. As a representative for their treatment, each
fingers medial joint is used. As per Ayurveda’s common principle, the pitta jt is representing
10 spiral meridians but for specific treatment, each finger has 10 spiral meridians.

According to Ayurveda, the importance of action-organs and sense-organs is
established as a coordinator of body and soul. This, in itself, s a wonderful thought. Hence,
the treatment of action organs and sense organs is feasible on every finger through spiral
meridian. On the pitta joint of a finger, treatment of a tissue, one hormone, one organ, one
hole etc.is possible and through this 10 spiral meridians on a finger, treatment of the
aforesaid is possible. For example, treatment on Rt hand’s IF Pitta joint of plasma, Thymus
gland, Right eye, Taste, Tongue etc is possible only by one type of spiral meridians.

It is worth examining whether it is possible to have treatment of many by one. Among
the common attributes of elements, combination is the most important. From Scientific
point of view also, eye has all nerves, elements and tissues, hence plasma being present
in eye also, plasma and eye have a combination. Thymus gland position has been identified
by scientist as above diaphragm and below throat; this gland is considered as maid for
children, from age of childhood to adolescence and from adolescence to adulthood. As per
Ayurveda, plasma’s sub-tissue is breast milk and menses, hence in deterioration and
development, it has important contribution. From this point of view also, plasma and eye
have direct connection. Based on Ayurvedic five elements (panchamahabhoot) and principle
of energy, the energy of water is plasma which is explained as tongue as the action organ.
So finger of water element is Rt IF, as per principle of combination, all can be treated in
different ways by one type of spiral meridian, and of the 10 but based on specific principle,
10 spiral meridians on this finger can treat plasma protein, watery content, vitamins,
enzymes and local internal secretions etc. When these spiral meridians are used for
treatment of eye ailments, then eye's ten parts, treatment for eyelid, sclera, cornea, choroids,
Iris, retina, ciliary-body, lens, vitrous body, optic nerve will be on Right IF ten spiral meridians.
Thus each molecule of body, by identifying as a meridian of Ayurveda has provided a
wonderful form. By these meridians, treatment of infinite ailments, centralizing them into

ten, is being successfully done.
