B)

disturbances and symptoms appear, all of these can be rectified and cured
with the direction of scriptures. Among these, the best divine and beyond
comprehension is the text of Ayurveda. So, for treatment of mental ailments,
Ayurvedic Acupressure has ultimate speciality. When body is healthy,
free from crime, the person will be joyous, happy and full of bliss. The
expression of mental ailments appears in the form of raj (royal) and tama
(evil). The absence of these two is satva (spirituality/truth). Achievement
of spirituality is the achievement of joy and the union of parmaatma (God)
and atma (soul) that is redemption. The treatment of such, almost incurable
ailments is the ultimate objective of Ayurveda.

Hence, karmas/ deeds are also cause of illness. There is for sure, good
results/ effects of good deeds and bad results/ effects of bad deeds. In
this category, wrong doings like misleading, violence, use of wrong/ bad
words, wrong/ bad words, wrong thinking etc lead to the cause and creation
of diseases.

Symptoms (linga-sutra) - The symptoms are the most important sub-
principle because behind everything there is some cause. When there will be
some cause, then there will be some result — this is the symptom. When due
to some cause, symptoms appear and then by means of symptoms, specific
knowledge of disease of a patient is obtained. This is an important subject of
diagnosis.

i) Un-manifested (poorva-roop) — The state before the appearance of
symptoms of a disease which are not clearly manifested, are in this section.
This is also a symptom of yogic therapy in which before the symptoms of
disease appear, effort is made to understand the ailment.

ii) Manifested (roop) — When symptoms of disease appear, then based on
the symptoms treatment should be suggested.

iii) Clearly manifested (upshaya) - When symptoms fully appear, then it is
called clearly manifested.

iv) Aggravated (anupshaya) — Further aggravation of symptoms lead
towards incurable level of an ailment.

v) Total exposure (samprapti) — This means appearance of all the
symptoms and their visible proof are present in the patient.

The two broad classification of symptoms are presence of physical and
mental symptoms. The physical symptoms appear in the form of vata,
pitta and kapha, and mental symptoms as raja and tama.

@
