Mode of Treatment | _Affieion——_—i|

1. Sympathetic

2. Parasym-
pathetic
Nervous

Time treatment on account of
seasonal variations i.e. seasonal
treatment (Treatment on all finger
NCH)

All organs dysfunction
(Treatment on all Toe
NCH)

Sun stroke, severe headache,
weakness, nausea, dizziness,
dehydration, diarrhoea, HBP, body
pain, joint pain, swelling

After food intake, if tissue

formation process is affected,
then parasympathetic control of

System

nervous system in case of
congenital diseases is required.
Afflictions of organs, brain, sense
organs etc.

* Disease — P-
Disease

* DISBeo8, wee Noein P-
Disease

The entire body can be divided at a macro level in ten regions. And treatment of
ailments in one region can be done on meridians available on a finger’s joint and at micro
level, treatment can be done on the various meridians available by dividing the finger into
ten. Treatment done on the nail chakras (NCH) on each fingers, has also been found to be
very effective.

In discussion of different treatments, meridians, nail chakras etc have been described
and the method of treatment has been mentioned.

3) Chakra:
i) Basis of origin of chakra:

The longitudinal and horizontal lines on the world map cross each other at several
points. These dividing points have great importance from mathematical point of view .When
two lines cross each other, importance of these dividing points, the points available after
dividing by spiral lines, are the coordinating points of the three lines and these represent
the three-dimensional form of any shape.Similarly, the middle line dividing the body vertically
on the middle has been considered as most important line (meridian) of the body .According
to the Chinese theory, this is the CV(conception vessel) meridian, which by its very name,
implies that it controls all the organs and sub organs close on either side of this meridian. In
the world map, this has been shown as the Greenwich Mean Time (GMT )line. Prof. Park
has considered this important meridian as a continous line all around the body as Central
Border meridian which is an important energy cycle which in Chinese therapy is CV meridian
in part of body and GV meridian in yang part of body. In the area of treatment, Prof. Park

