milky way in the sky; These correspond to the meridians as reservoirs of energy in which
acupoints are like the stars. Based on prowess as importance of stars is explained in the
same way acupoints on the meridians, in the form of chakras have been identified, according
to their energy. On the central of the body, eight important chakras have been told which,
as per yogshaastra ,are located near the middle line connecting the brain centre to the
anus. These have been known down to upwards and up to downwards from Kundilini,
Muladhaar to Sahasraar and directing form sahasraar to kundalini have been known .In
the light of Ayurveda, if the subject of chakras is discussed, then for infinite mass of organs
/sub-organs (pind), there are infinite number of chakras located but based on ten-origin
principle, there number can be located to only ten. The above mentioned eight chakras,
whether manifested or non-manifested, in the form of creation, respectively are Brahma
and Sun chakra; their location is respectively in nucleus in the brain and navel in the centre
of body. It is due to effect of Surya chakra that an embryo develops for nine months in the
mother’s womb. After delivery, the placenta is separated from the body and the new born
baby attains the manifested form. Actually, whatever form the cosmos or the human body
may have, their creation has been initially in the form of a point and its macro form is
created as infinite non-manifested cosmos and bodies.

At the beginning of creation, the form of embryo is like a point, which gradually nourishes
and develops in the mother’s womb from foetus to an infant. It is in a sequence of time
according to development and constitution, their dimensions develop as a dual dimensional
creation. Surya and Brahma chakras are the two poles of source of energy. As a
manifestation, again the dimensions change and
appear as Brahma chakra, in forming sahasraar and
kundailini ,is considered as two dimensions. The
subject is still being discussed and researched
upon by both scientists and philosophers.

In yogshastra, these chakras have been
described on the body’s middle line, mainly eight
chakras have been mentioned as kundilini,
muladhaar, swadhisthaan, Manipura, anaahat,
vishudha, Ajna_ and sahasraar. Actually, there are
infinite components of the world and the main base
of the whole world, Brahma is also the source of
infinite energy. Hence it's parts are also infinite.
Keeping this Brahma Sutra in mind these infinite
chakras can be studied into 10 chakras, based on
the ten origin principle.

Location of Chakras in Body

