Dr. S. V. Zoll has explained the importance and growth of chakras, in his book, “Bridge
between Acupuncture and modern Bio energetic medicine’ as follows:-

‘Although there is no mention of chakras in traditional Chinese medicine, | am convinced
from my study of both eastern philosophy and comparative religion over past fifteen years,
that the chakras are superior energetic control centres of the acupuncture meridian system
and that they are built into the structure of man. The chakras ignite communication between
the emotional, mental and spiritual planes. Therefore, the chakras may not only unlock the
mystery of many obstinate illnesses, but act as a hinge between one’s psychic evolution
and past karma.’

‘The chakras are an important and vital life extension of the acupuncture meridian
system. The author believes that the chakras are the glue that holds together the body,
mind and soul. They are the bridge between the psychic and somatic occurrence in the
body. The chakras elevate the development of the soul of a person. They are transformation
centres, and are linked to the core of our evolution and consciousness during the individual's
life and during reincarnation’

“Each body/mind has within itself energy centres for controlling the flow of prana and
a system of energy channels. These channels are called nadi's and the centres controlling
them are known as Chakras. In the physical body, the energy channels are presented by
cardiovascular, lymphatic and acupuncture meridian systems, and the energy centres are
represented by the brain, nervous plexus and acupuncture points.’

ii) The basis of treatment through Grahas/ planets:

According to Acupuncture principle, even though chakras are dense region of non-
manifested energy, but even in them the Bi principle applies. Similar to the chakras are
Brahmas planets and stars. Even though non-manifested, these chakras exist in the body
but their comparatively macro non-manifested form is planets. Hence, treatment of planets
is also feasible in Ayurveda.

According to Ayurveda, There are nine elements and the tenth element is Tama
(darkness). In the same way, all chakras are creation of Brahma chakra and the originator
of all planets is Brahma himself. The location of planets (grahas) have been indicated in the
right palm as below:

219
