Ayurvedic Acupuncture, bio-energy, i.e., chetna is taken as the medicine. In
Ayurveda, all substances are elements and in all substances energy exists in some
form or the other based on the importance of energy. The substance is called either
living or non-living. Living being is also an element which is an integration/combination
of body (visible) and soul (invisible). Here, the human body in the form of living
being is a subject of study for treatment by Ayurvedic Acupuncture. With this
objective in mind, the entire thinking is described in these pages. In Ayurveda,
consciousness is termed as soul (aatma). People who learned Chinese acupuncture,
called this consciousness as energy & termed these segments as elements. They
grouped all the elements into only five main elements and their related energies and
then based the entire treatment therapy by Acupuncture. But the Chinese scientists
perhaps did not identify the defined energy and in the same way scientists also
merely considered energy as a philosophical concept and did not make specific
attempts to establish harmony. However, the entire Ayurvedic thought is based on
similarities and the infinite components of cosmos and human body, being similar to
each other. So, a comparative study is necessary between the subjects of ‘energy’,
propounded by the scientists and soul- Ayurvedic point of view.

Scientists have defined energy as the power that provides ability to work. Energy
is power (capacity) of doing work and Power is defined as rate of supplying energy.
Further Work is defined in terms of Force and distance (displacement) and force
studied in terms of mass and acceleration (change in velocity). Therefore in totality
energy is related with power, work, force, mass, distance and time. Thus energy is
studied in integrated manner. Energy is directly related with power and work (keace&)
and result of work is work done (keace&heaue). The term energy is directly related
with work that is force (mass and acceleration) and distance. In Ayurveda the entire
concept of energy is propounded and elaborated in solitary Shlok as under :

“a J Sac Pornaa cent enfant vata; centr fe searnaqqoaTae
FeRpMTaed aa ore aaerexormraa at aia gferes a a
aaRica aq pda aq of, d4 pda add, aa pda aaltrexvi, gar
pte a ore:, aon pda a sore:, aq Mea aq wer”
(Shlok-13, Pg.-472 (H))
The elements(dravyas) are not only active due to their properties(gunn) but also
due to the effects of elements, effects of properties and the effects of both element
and property; and also due to the time / moment they come into action; the place/
residence where activity takes place; the techniques / methods used and the
purpose of the activity — all this is called karma (function). The component involved
is called virya(hormones etc.); the place affected due to it is called adhikaran
(residence); the moment when worked is called kaal(time); the way / methods used
is called upaay(technique) and the purpose fulfilled is called phall(result).

G2)
