Treatment on Grahas : As stated in the previous pages, the ten grahs can be
measured by the head regions. The natural demarcations of ten regions from neck to back
of head are made. For their treatment , the ten locations are plotted on the right palm. (On
the left palm, treatment of chakras while on right, treatment of grahas is done). Grahas are
measured on palm by 2 finger difference and by energy inference, treatment is given.

When after repeated treatment patterns, the patient is having no relief, the graha
treatment is advised. As illustrated abve, in the treatment by divine methods, the grah
treatment has been listed. Frequent mishappenings occur when the grah conditions are
not okay. The person/patient is enveloped in the grah energy and gets diseased.

Hence treatment by grahas comes under daiv vyapashray divine treatment methods
just like yagya etc.

4) Regional Treatment :

The regional treatment is actually based on the concept from macro to micro .In old
and weak state, even the minute part of the body becomes sick. In such a condition,
irrespective of any therapy, relief does not take place and no treatment is successful. So
the location of that minute part and based on the disease diagnosis, then treatment given is
very effective. Actually, regional treatment is similar to the filing system of a computer in
which based on the contents menu is searched and then file, subfile, sub-subfile is located.
Regional treatment is exactly similar.

i) Salient Features of Regional Treatment

1) This is primarily physical treatment.

2) Standard correspondence is primarily physical treatment, but regional treatment
is micro physical treatment.

3) All big - small organs of the body and various regions micro, minute, minutes
regions etc can be more actively treated by regional treatment method and it is
very important.

4) Regional treatment is similar to surgery. According to common attributes of
element, using to the principle of separation and division, body's micro to mini
portion inactive region can be made active without physical surgery. To destroy
the damaged region is also feasible by Regional treatment.
