5)

6)

7)

8)

Paralysis is due to damage of some cells or group of cells of the brain. For this
the effect of paralysis due to damaged cells can be removed, without surgery, by
the principle of regional treatment by 10 origin principle by dividing the brain at
several axes and separating the cells from damaged ones. This has been found
effective in several cases.

The principle of energy is based on economy. To treat a minute location, treating
by giving the entire energies is a waste of energy. Hence, the regional treatment
is mainly physical but is equally effective at all metaphysical level, also.
Regional treatment is a three dimensional treatment. Through this diagnosis,
treatment and improvement of immunity can be done.

By dividing the body's organs /sub organs into macro and micro regions, this
treatment is developing into a multi-dimensional one. For example - the effect of
body's any one macro dimension is visibly felt at many levels like a specific part
of brain, a sense organ, an action organ, a part of throat, a hormonal gland, an
organ above the diaphragm, and at least one organ below the diaphragm and
area of rectum and mainly one tissue or a combined form of that region on all the

tissues. Hence, this can be considered as a multi-dimensional treatment.
ii) Treatment based on Meridian Pathway :

For treatment we have vertical, horizontal and spiral
meridians through which is treatment of body is essential
for example:- In case of pain of abdomen, about 3-4 fingers
to the right of the navel, for location of actual pain, the
whole body should be divided in to 10- vertical meridian
and 10- horizontal meridians and 10- spiral meridians; One
comes to know, as per the finger below, The area between
1/4 vertical meridians and 2/3 HZM and the actual area of
pain(as shown in diagram).To treat this, the most effective
and mini treatment is possible on 5" spiral meridian.

Analysis: 1,4 vertical meridian effected our body’s
brain’s right part, sense organs and tonsils in the throat
and several glands and also covers liver, duodenum, small
intestine, large intestine and specially appendix area; and
the horizontal ones touch most of the intestines. It is clear
that when the above named meridians are effected, they

