affect the brain, liver and intestine area but also these meridians can give disease to organs
and tissues also. In normal condition, appendix related ailments can cause several
syndromes like fever, vomiting, shivering, body aches, cough ,cold, stomach/ back aches
etc. In both conditions (disease, syndromes), the 5" spiral meridians can treat in common
and specific by selecting elements specifically.

iii) Regional Divisions of the Body :

According to 10- origin principle, classification of
different parts of body, can be done based on Ayurveda,
in sequence of heaviness and lightness for example, ;
treating trunk’s lowest parti.e., anus as 0 and body's upper
most part-head —as 9, the remaining 8 parts of the trunk
can be divided as shown in the sketch

In the first part i.e., Appendix, Small intestines, Large
Intestines, Right Ovary, Urinary Bladder’s right part’s
diseases appear. In part 2- Small Intestine, Large Intestine,
Left ovary and Urinary Bladder's left part is covered. In
part 3 - It is above part 2- left side portion- other than the
large and small intestine, spleen, stomach.In part 4— which
are situated on the right side- cover’s liver, right kidney,
duodenum- their treatment based on regional classification
has been found very strong and effective.

Based on the above sketch, Right Leg by part 1 and Left Leg by part 2, Right Arm by
part 8, left arm by part-7 are clearly visible. A few case histories, indicating wonderful
results by such treatments, are indicated below:-

Case -1: Sri Guddo Kumar Gupta, 20years, Naini station - ph — 2698710: The above
named patient, came to the Sansthan and informed that when he sits cross legged, the
right heel remains raised and the right leg from knee to heel is thin; he also mentioned other
symptoms. By seeing the patient in lying down position, right leg was found to be longer
than the left leg. Right leg region is 1, by pressing Toe NCH (1), patient got immediate relief
and looked like a miracle by all present at the time. The following treatment was given:Toe
NCH (1) - 2, 3, 4 ton 7 sed
