Case -2: Sri Vinod Kumar — 24 years- Lalitnagar Rly colony House No A710. This young
man was brought supported by another person, the patient informed that after sitting and
then standing, he feels so much trouble that he cannot stand without support; and on
standing he feels unbearable pain, back ache, swelling and burning feet. All told, there was
massive pain in both legs below the back. As per regional analysis, by pressing on nail
chakras 1, 2 i.e.( both feet smallest toes), the patient immediately started standing and
sitting and relief in pain and swelling. This was watched in astonishment by those present
at the centre. This is amazing no doubt, but through classical knowledge all is feasible. The
following treatment was given:

21.3.04 - (1) NCH(1) 3 sed 7 Tone (finger and Toe both)
(2) NCH (2) 2sed3 Tone ( ,, ” ” )

Case- 3: Sri Suresh Chandra Kesarwani- Allahabad. The patient for one year was suffering

from enlarged prostate, Knee pain, headache, piles and eye trouble and was being treated

for several disease symptoms and he had benefited in several areas. But for last 1

months, was not getting relief in pain on the right side last rib on walking. So treatment for

region 5, on right ring finger nail by pressing which gave immediate relief to him.
Treatment - NCH(5) 5sed6 tone

Case -4: A middle age lady patient complained of pain in both hands and was not getting
any relief from various therapies. So she was treated based on NCH (7, 8) by mere pressing
she had immediate relief.

Treatment given was NCH (7, 8) 2 sed 1 tone
Case -5: The lady paient had leucoderma, diabetes etc several ailments and had some
relief on treatment, but for the last one month had dull headache. For this, she was given
following treatment and she accepted relief within 10 minutes.NCH(9) 2 sed 1 tone
Case -6: Sri Chedilal-55 years, Bharwari, Allahabad, ph: 0531-222243. He had numbness
in a part of left small toe. Based on regional treatment, NCH (2) was pressed to diagnose;
the following treatment resulted in 40% relief in a week.NCH (2) 2, 1 tone 6 sed
Case -7: For ringworm etc in thighs, treatment is Rt SF 0 Hzm 2, 4 sed 1, 5 tone.( On
Akash finger 0 Hzm, treatment was given-as 0 region is Thigh area of itching), the patient
informed excellent relief.
