iv) Regional Treatment by Vertical Meridians -VM :

According to Ayurvedic 10-origin principle, the entire body, can be divided into regions
as shown in the sketch earlier. In the dividing lines, meridians have been imagined. The
meridians are a proof of philosophers, academicians and scientists divine philosophy and
their use in the Ayurvedic Acupuncture therapy is giving miraculous results, only proved
by our rishies & munis divine vision. In fact meridians that divide the body in ten parts,
these are front & back, make a total of five energy circles. Thus normally & at a macro
level, there are 5 maha (big) meridians and 10 meridians which correspond to body’s
infinite no. of organs. So infinite diseases, can be cured through 5 mega and 10 meridians.
Successful attempt has been made of this at the sansthan . As already mentioned earlier
in this book, from a vertical meridian, all organs in a particular region can be treated
collectively. Normally, in a region, organs along & near a vertical meridian, can be classified
as below; this principle is applicable to all regions equally.

1-  Aportion of the Brain 2-  Aportion of the sense organs

3- A portion of the action organs 4- Aportion of the throat

5-  Aportion of the above diaphragm 6- Aportion of the below diaphragm
7- One endocrine gland 8- Onehole

9-  Aportion of rectum

For example, the treatment area & basis is more widespread compared to the horizontal
meridians. These meridians treat jointly various components of brain, trunk and connected
organs.From ordinary ailments to serious ones, both can be treated by these vertical
meridians. In the initial stages of disease, it is not necessary that all organs, endocrine
glands or tissues etc. are affected. But based on the state of a disease, treatment at these
meridians can be given both short term and long term. Due to seasonal change, drinking
water or eating food, swelling of glands in the oral cavity, dizziness, tiredness, insomnia
etc. disease symptoms appear. An other reason is that due to presence of microbes in
small/ large intestines, constipation, indigestion etc, glands in the oral cavity are effected
resulting in chronic ailments. What it means is that due to tonsils & other glands, ailments
of intestines, Heart & Lungs arise. Due to intestines tonsils may be affected .From the view
point of causative factor, brain in which main gate is the mouth & in both activity & in action
the chest and abdomen are responsible so by the vertical meridian, as chest and abdomen
both are simultaneous treated, the treatment is extremely effective. The importance has
been indicated by a few of the following examples:
