& then again in 5 macro parts has been done. The body has been divided in 10 horizontal,
10 vertical & 10 spiral meridians and in that sequence the horizontal, vertical & spiral
meridians have been identified on the thumbs, big toe & on every fingers/ toe. Actually,
contracting the infinite into 10 & then into 5 results into two meridians into a pair of meridians
called long vertical meridians LVM. It is clear by the following sketches that the right side of
the body has 1-8 LVM and 4-5 LVM, whereas the left part of the body has 2-7 LVM and 3-
6 LVM. From treatment point of view, these long meridians have been proved to be very
effective and important. The long vertical meridian of 0/9 actually divides the body centrally
into two parts, and is basically a conscience dividing line. When we have to treat wide area
of right / left of the body, then we should select a correct pair and then treat.

Division of brain, in vertical mode can be done through the middle line of vertex. This
at the back, is in the medulla region and on the face between the eye brows, goes via the
nose, mouth and the chin .This meridian,0/9 long vertical meridian is the principal long
vertical meridian. To its right is the 1/8 LVM, which at the back is in the medulla right region
and goes touching the face and eyes region makes an important long vertical meridian.
Similarly is the 2/7 long vertical meridian which on the left side touching the medulla region
at the back and in front goes up to below the eyes. A part from these, the 3/6 LVM touches
the area all around the left ear and the 4/5 LVM touches the area all around the right ear.

Importance of LVM :According to Ayurveda, living body has the infinite form of
cosmos, as a unit and its macro form can be divided into two and ultimately in 10 parts and
then through classification (regional) treatment is feasible of all organs, sub organs and
cells, of the body. According to subtle-gross principle, out of 10, 2-2 vertical meridians
pair,2-2 Horizontal meridians pair and 2-2 spiral meridians pair is available for subtle level
treatment. Based on this, the above mentioned meridians, due to integration of head and
body make it possible for the birth of human life. Again, chest & abdomen as two components
and further brain, chest and abdomen area together give this Tri-origin form. Similarly, both
for cause and effect, these meridians are active. Then by the use of pair of vertical meridians
and pair of Horizontal meridians, it is feasible to treat symptoms and problems of ailments
arising in the three—head, chest, abdomen areas- by finding one LVM or Horizontal
meridians. Therefore, examination of a patient and through study / diagnosis and by
understanding the symptoms with these areas, it is a very important process to select a
proper meridian.

(3)
