For Example : It has been seen that in Diabetes patients, liver functioning not being
normal, carbohydrate conversion to glucose does not properly take place which results in
sugar ions passing to blood and urine ; because of impurity in the blood that makes Kidneys
and heart to work extra. Diabetic patients generally suffer from either heart or Kidney
diseases.4/5 long vertical meridian clearly touches Liver, Kidney, Heart, Lungs, Small
intestine and large intestine regions. Hence using proper points on only this LVM, not only
diabetes but Angina and Nephrotic-syndrome can all be treated. In fact, treatment through
LVM is wide spread and effective.

3/6 LVM - Similar is the 3/6 LVM; It goes from left brain behind the left ear to foot toe
no. 6 and in front of the body along eye, throat and left side heart and lung region, spleen,
descending colon, small intestine, and left pelvis and thigh region and then going down to
knee, calf's internal side till foot’s third toe. Thus this pair can treat blood impurity related
ailments and ailments of left side heart ,lung, kidney, spleen, stomach etc and thigh, knee,
calf, toe no.3 ‘s carpal and metacarpal bones, deformity in finger phalanges and bones.
Hence each pair of meridians-LVMs is very effective from treatment point of view. It is
generally seen that due to infection in the GIT, toxins enter every part of body through the
meridian of blood vessels. In the region of this LVM, acute and chronic ailments in the
sense organs like eye, ear and node, cyst, fibroid, lesions in brain's parietal lobe, can be
treated by this LVM.

2/7 LVM-This LVM travels separately in the body’s left part from head to toe and
touches in front from head to sense organs (eye), throat glands, organs located in the
chest and abdomen and onwards to thigh, knee, ankle, toe.7. In the rear, while moving
down from scapula’s left side, thoracic and complete spine region to nipple areas, popliteal
muscles and then in the legs rear part, all joints upto toe no. 2 This LVM touches left side’s
parathyroid/ thyroid glands and reproductive system’s left ovary. By this LVM, treatment of
the above areas ailments can be done.

This LVM is important for the treatment of paralysis of left side in which left hand and
left leg are affected. This paralysis is due to injury and damage to cells in brain's opposite
lobe. Hence, left hemiplegia by 1/8 LVM and right hemiplegia by 2/7 LVM should be done.
In the patients of paralysis, problems in mid brain’s lowest part, treatment should be done
in the opposite lobe of brain and damage in the upper part of mid brain, treatment on the
same side lobe of brain is to be done. In the regional classification of the trunk, detailed
earlier, left arm's energy meridian is 7and left leg’s region is 2. Right arm’s energy is region
8 and right leg's energy source is in region 1.It is therefore clear that treatment of region’s
of right and left leg’s is feasible by LVMs.

But the combinations of abdomen being with the brain, 1/8, 2/7 are respectively very
effective treatment region for right and left hemiplegia. At the same time, both the LVMs

