touch the pituitary gland and the gonads on both left and right side. Ladies who suffer from
directional and emotional problems due to women’s aliments tn which apart from female's
ailments in which the ailment is due to menses and feproduction systems as also the
mental state is disturbed, in such cases treatment is not by psychiatry but treating the
women's ailment primary responsible acu-points on LVM 2/7 should be appropriate, chosen
and treatment is desirable.

0/9 LVM-Even though each pair of meridians ( LVM ) are extremely important from
treatment point of view, but 0/9 LVM expanse is very wide, from rectum to symphysis
bone, Gonads, Thoracic duct, all organs of GIT, Thymus gland inside the throat, oropharynx,
nasopharynx- which are the source of food pipe / wind pipe, Nasal cavity, Neocortex
deep inside the brain and from the rear of brain's interior down to the rectum. The 0/9 LVM
should be selected for the treatment of several serious diseases like prostate enlargement,
uterine fibroid, damage of cells in the interior of brain causing tongue paralysis or larynx
box. Patients having ailments of reproductive system, excretory system etc are seen to
have problems of various regions in back, cervical problems, loss of eye sight etc and
such symptoms should indicate treatment on 0/9 LVM. Prenatal diseases and serious
ailments of GIT due to chronic microbial infection resulting in diseased body tissues, bent
spine etc. giving several symptoms and their treatment by other therapies is not possible,
in such ailments long term treatment through 0/9 LVM is given.

1/8 LVM- The long vertical meridians from right of middle line of body touches from
head to right eye, throat tonsil, right lung, right breast, parts of right side of abdomen, some
parts of liver, parts of intestines, right ovary, in the front; similarly in body's rear right side,
head's right side, neck’s right side, spine’s right side scapula’s inside, it reaches terminates
at toe no 1&8. Through this LVM eye ailments, jaws & 1, 2 upper lower teeth, pain in throat,
tension in neck due to tonsils, can be treated. In the eyes, sensory nerves affecting area &
brain area's, rear occupational part is in LVM’S range and hence 1/8 LVM proves very
effective and very simple for the above related ailments. Again, breathing problems, back
ache, problems in right side of pelvis and lower back 1/8 LVM is effective. This LVM affects
mainly the lymph & is very useful in the regulation of the body.

1/8 LVM related case histories:

Case-1: Sri Ankush, 23yrs, 404 meerapur, Allahabad, ph:3155973. The patient informed
on 19.02.04 of continuous pain on head's right side & eye & it increases in the evening; he
also stated of allergy with light & irritation. The following treatment was given

o 9]
Rt. Thumb 1/8 LVM - 0, 3, 47 5, 7, 8 FRGEEREGL FG]

On 8.4.04 the patient reported 50% relief in head ache & 90% relief in allergy & irritation.

Case -2 Sri Manoj Tiwari,15yrs, Gomti Nagar Lucknow. ph - 2721004, 3226837. The
patient informed on 4.4.04 that he was attacked by polio from the age of 6 months. In the
right leg & that even now the right heel is bent, numbness in the leg & mid toe is bent down

