Among these LHMs, the 0/9 LHM is the longest and biggest energymeridian; 1/2 and
3/4 LHM are on the front side; 1/2 LHM is of less energy while 3/4 LHM is of more expanse;
similarly at the back, 5/6 LHM is of less energy while 7/8 LHM is of more energy hence is
named and placed accordingly.

Importance of Long Horizontal Meridian (LHM) : In cases, where both the organs
have to be treated together, LHMs have been found very effective. For example- if a patient’s
both Kidneys are effected, or non functional or if both Lungs have become diseased or in
the middle of the body both liver/ spleen are affected in such cases, the meridian (LHM)
joining these organs, jointly can be feasible. In blood impurity 3/4 LHM and in paralysis
when both arms and legs are affected then treatment by 7/8 LHM is feasible. Inflammation
or lesion from neck down to the entire spine region — such types of ailments can be treated
through 5/6 LHM. ,

1/2 LHM : It has generally been seen that youth are not aware of the physical education
and get engaged in sexual activities, their memory becomes weak, and symptoms of
cold/cough and pain in arms & legs etc. appears; for treatment of these can be done
through 1/2 LHM. It is clear from such groups of these symptoms, that a person’s mentality
(Mind) is so much based on behaviour and food and so much affects 1/2 LHM. It has been
estimated that tissues (from plasma to sperms) formed out of food are created from one to
seven days. If a person does excess of sexual activity and his sperm loss is excessive,
then simultaneously with physical loss, mental power also reduces. So much that it is
impossible even to control constipation. In ladies, when both ovaries are deformed, a situation
of infertility arises and several mental ailments take place. Rashes come out in throat and
tongue, saliva formation and secretion is affected or leucorrhoea takes place. Menstrual
cycle is also effected. Thus, several female diseases can be treated only through 1/2
LHM.

Case Histories Related to 1/2LHM:

Case -1 : Baby Seedhi Misra, 2,1/2 yrs, 148 Baghambari Housing scheme Allapur, Alld.
For blocked nose due to cold, the following treatment was given on 25.3.04. Rt Th. 1/2LHM
-0, 3 tone 4, 9 sed. The patient's mother informed on- 2.4.04.90% relief in blocked nose.
Case -2 : Sri Mahesh Chandra, 28 yrs,636/371A Rajapur Alld. The patient informed on
6.4.04 that for one month, he gets headache during studying, suffers from constipation
since 1991 and from cold and cough and allergy since 1987. He was given the following
treatment on 1/2LHM.
