These serve as the energy gates of the brain in general and vital centres of exchange
of energy. The finger nail chakras are meant for exchanging heavenly energy and toe nail
chakra interact with the earthly energies , which is a part of the fundamental basis of yogic
philosophy. According to the esoteric philosophy, the creation is best manifested by heaven,
earth and human. Basically two macro types of energies, heavenly and earthly interact
always and affect the creatures. According to acupuncture principles, every phenomenon
is manifested in duality, yin yang and this principle is further expanded by Prof. Park of
korea into trio of every phenomenon by ho/he/ne. Homo and hetro are almost similar to yin
and yang but the neutro force is the controlling force over yin and yang. Further Prof Park
introduced the 4rth fundamental force which is responsible for all these three , called as
neuto, thus propounding the principle of four. This can be seen everywhere in the human
body and best manifested in each finger. The proximal joint as homo, middle as neutro, the
distal as hetro whereas the nail which is on the tip of each finger , is known as neuto. This
neuto force is nothing but cosmic energy, sometimes exchanging directly from cosmos by
tips of hands and by interaction, it connects to earth and transfers through the human body
upto toes. For example , in summer season, there is plenty of heat energy prevailing in the
atmosphere and body. Excess heat affects the brain directly and the heat permeating the
land affects the human body through soles and feet. Similarly in cold season, similar process
happens. In most cases, the cold effect is through head and spinal cord and affliction of
cosmic energy by soles through the sciatica nerve. They receive the cold energy from the
earth and all afflictions are through these toes of the soles.

Principles of Treatment on Nail chakras:

(1) According to Ayurvedic common/specific principle, all diseases can be treated through
finger / toe nail chakras.

(2) Specially, the use of finger nail chakras is more effective in treatment of diseases
above diaphragm region, brain, various parts of symptoms of ailments of arms.

(3) Similarly, toes nail chakras are helpful in treating diseases of regions below the
diaphragm, various parts of brain and various parts of legs.

(4) Itis feasible to treat any organ, related sense organs and action organ and treatment
of arms/legs regional treatment i.e., multilevel treatment by the single nail chakra. For
example, a single meridian- (this being the basis of treatment) is present as an element
and energy's yin-yang constituent. A single meridian influences the entire region from
head to toe including the body in between. So through a single yin- yang meridian,
different types of regional ailments including digestion, reproduction, joint related
