19)

20)

21)

gos ait wed aaftafiantorg) aeardaremey ararenry FT 1111311
ft Bet a oa: ada Goad!
(Shlok-108 to 113, Pg.~43 (H))
Milk is generally sweet, unctuous, cool, lactogenic, refreshing, nourishing, libidinal
stimulant, useful for intelligence, strength giving, useful for mental faculties,
invigorating, fatigue dispelling, reliever of dyspnoea and bronchitis; it cures rakta
pitta (bleeding from different parts of the body) and heips healing of the wound. It is
wholesome for all living beings and is alleviator and eliminator (of doshas). It quenches
thirst and is appetiser. It is exceedingly useful in phthisis, anaemia, hyperacidity,
consumption, abdominal tumour, ascites, diarrhoea, fever, burning syndromes, and
specially in oedema. It is also useful in diseases of female genital tract, male
reproductive fluid, in oliguria and hard stool. It is wholesome diet for those suffering
from (diseases due to) vata and pitta. Milk is always useful for inhalation, an ointment,
bathing, emesis, purgation and unction.
Symptoms of good physician:
ahr g a erserctantar! ges ges dhe a set freer: 1112411
(Shiok-124, Pg.-46 (H))
The physician who properly knows the quantity of medicine to be given, based on
time and analysing every person’s / patient’s state (female, child, old etc) is known
as a good physician.
Physician's effort to make disease free:
fregypitara: eaqorenate | ak waeraferese wore: kare eT OMT 1113411
(Shlok-134, Pg.-48 (H))
The intelligent one who wants to be a physician, should be alert and do sincere
efforts to sustain life in the diseased.
Definition of medicine and physician:
ata Oe desc ceRbara oecd! © da Presa Meet Wheat a: wateaq 1113511
(Shiok-135, Pg.-48 (H))
The medicine (made of different element combinations) is suitable to provide good
health; similarly the physician who relieves the diseased of its illness is known to be
of good calibre.

(In this chapter, the shlokas useful in treatment have been collected from Charak
Samhita of Brahmanand Tripathi- chapter-1 of Sutrasthana).

9900
