Nail Chakra (Multilevel Treatment Field)- Nail Chakras can be studied in various
forms. The nail chakras which represent different parts of brain are representatives of
body's social frame work. They function in the same manner as the internet
communication system connects different form of places and establishes relationship
based on Time, direction, location and Distance etc.

(6) As a family nail chakras 0&9 can be said in the form of duality as mother for them and
they form a couple /pair. This undivided pair is responsible for all creations. According
to Ayurveda 0 is indicator of the birth of creation or creativity and 9 is seen as the last
stop (death) Soul. Thus it is proof, positive that all creations are from mother’s womb
but this is possible only with the help of father. Establishment of soul in the ova is by
the semen only and further creations follow. The expression of five elements from
Aakash to Earth and of the metaphysical elements from Time to Soul is sequential and
as a family, utilization of these ten creations, through multiple permutations and
combination of elements is helpful in treatment.

Therefore, NCH (0) can be utilized in the treatment of diseases related to birth or
when creations are not timely. NCH (0) controls body area below the diaphragm and NCH
(9) controls body areas above the diaphragm i.e., head and chest. As Five elements,
Thumb is the controller of the four fingers and so the thumb also represents the brain. NCH
(0) and NCH (9), together with their partner chakras, present a multilevel treatment system.

As an example, NCH (3)’s regions expansion is indicated below. In a similar manner,
other nail chakras can also be used.

Treatment areas of NCH(3):

1) Brain's third regional division

2) Both eyes as action organs

3) Blood tissue and its related ailments

4) Pancreas gland and related ailments

5) Liver- Gall bladder pair organs treatment
6) Fire (no.3 ) energy related symptoms

7) Anger ( emotion )

8) Left eye as a hole

9) Problems related to planet Mangal (Mars)

