Under the expansion, both extension and flexon are included. Similarly in contraction,
extension is included. Under normal circumstances eyelids remain open. Hence, extension
has not been mentioned. This vaayu is active in the fluid circulation in the body and is
responsible for the production and excretion of sweat. It helps in blood circulation, and
establishes the five types of desires of the body written below-

(1) Movement

(2) Downwards movement

(3) Upward movement

(4) Contraction

(5) Extension

Vyaanvaayu has been accepted to be the cause of fluid circulation and activator of all
desires. The heart plays a key role in fluid circulation. Like other body fluids, plasma, blood
etc. also move from high towards low pressure. The difference between the arterial blood
pressure and venous blood pressure is a cause of blood circulation. The arterial blood
pressure depends upon the peripheral resistance and cardiac output. The peripheral
resistance is controlled by the vasomotor centre and heart by cardiac centre. Both these
centres are situated in the brain. Vagus nerve and sympathetic nerves actively participate
in these activities. Almost all involuntary functions are controlled by these nerves. Due to
the external senses being less active during the time of sleep, the activity of sympathetic
nerves also becomes less active. As a result, vagus nerve slows the rate of heart beat.
On its contrary, in awaken and excited state, the activity of sympathetic nerves increases
resulting in an increase in heart beat and speeding up of circulation.

Symptoms of imbalance of Vyaanvaayu :

(1) Joint cracking (2) Arthritis
(3) Nervousness (4) Excess & Urination
(5) Poor circulation (6) Heart irregularity

(7) Difficult body movement

(4) Samaan Vayu :
Wadergadih atcift waftitod:| seamed oder: warisfaaewe: ||
(Shlok-8, Pg.-934 (H.2))

Place and functions of Samaan vayu- It resides in sweat, vata doshas etc and the
water sources/ meridians, near to jatharaagni(digestive fire) and increases the digestive
power.

Samaanvaayu moves in stomach and duodenum and strengthen the digestive fire for
digestion of food. Those places where the digestive secretion reacts on food substances
