Chapter - 3
Six Components of Ayurveda

Fetorl aqqeieraserraag | Sara a fees a yoy xeon af a 112811
Brad U coetea cated ener: | SRR aa arf shed Mec 112911
(Shlok-28, 29, Pg.-11 (H))
Those rishis divinely visualised the six components-1. Samaanya(common)
2.Vishesh(specific) 3. Gunn(properties) 4.Dravya(elements) 5. Karm(functions) and 6.
Samvaay(Combination) and attained happy and long life by adopting ayurvedic methods.
Entire world is materialistic/physical. It has infinite components, each of which
themselves are elements. An element has been defined in different ways by different
branches of knowledge. Knowledge has two main prevalent branches — one western and
the other eastern which are based on respectively, science and philosophy. On this basis,
the treatment therapies have originated in the different parts of the world. In the western
world, the most modern and advanced treatment therapy — the allopathic treatment system
has developed and in the rest of the world different types of therapies like Ayurveda,
Acupressure, Acupuncture, Yoga, Pranic healing, Reiki, hypnotism, colour therapy, sun
therapy, sound therapy, aroma therapy, etc. have developed. To be able to appreciate
what an element is, it is necessary to mention both view points and to establish some
harmony between the two. If the world is one, then how can the west and the east be
separate? If the entire world is of elements, then its organs, sub-organs and so on, up to
the minute level can't be imagined different from an element. A detailed description of element
is being done in this chapter because when everything from zero to infinity are all elements,
then only their form, structure, function and attribute can be different, and this only proves
the dictum of unity in diversity. Science also has made matter as the basis of their studies.
The matter has three forms — solid, liquid and gas. For the study of these three forms of
matter several scientific studies have been developed and in the scientific world continuous
study and research goes on.Scientists have considered element as a part of matter and
only 124 elements out of the infinite ones have been discovered so far. The utility of these
elements and the basis for their use is based on their attributes and functions. On this
basis, the importance of the most commonly known elements oxygen, hydrogen, uranium,
gold, iron, calcium, mercury, etc. is also well known. In respect of each element, scientists
have discovered separately their attributes and functions (properties) and their use is
gradually becoming prevalent.
@

