are stomach, duodenum and small intestine. Here samaanvaayu helps digestive fire to
digest food in proper way. All these functions done by samaanvaayy, helps in digestion of
food and after digestion its absorption, wastes get separated and reach to rectum for
excretion.

Imbalance in samaanvaayu creates the diseases as constipation, diarrhoea,
indigestion etc. In digestion of food samaanvaayu is helpful in two ways- (1) To move
digestive secretion at their action place and (2) creates movement in stomach and intestine.
Main contribution is of vagus nerve. Digestive secretion increases by the stimulation of
this nerve. Its opposite effect is by parasympathetic nerve. In intestinal movement, nerve
plexus of motor nerve present in intestinal wall and nerve plexus of sensory nerve mainly
takes part. The functions of these plexus are peristaltic movement in intestine and to maintain
elasticity of intestinal wall. Both these plexus relates with the sympathetic nerves,
parasympathetic nerves, vagus nerve and renal nerve, because of this their function
sometime is fast or slow accordingly. After disconnecting with other nerves, function of
both the plexus continues and likewise in this stage peristaltic movement also continues.

Symptoms of imbalance of samaanvaayu:

(1) Too slow or too fast movement of food (2) Indigestion
(3) Diarrhoea (4) Gas or gastritis
(5) Poor nutrition (6) Low energy

(7) Dehydration
(5) Apaan Vayu :
get aReatg o ane dail yeq!| soPRUP: Yoyapha a
Spradanit a gee: wraRecna a) wrod pda det ered dear: ||
(Shlok-10, 11, Pg.-935 (H))

Place and functions of Apaan Vayu- The places of apaan vayu are ovaries, urinary
bladder, male genitals, navel,chest, testis, anus. The apaan vayu in the intestines helps in
excretion of semen, urine, stool, menses and the foetus.

Testicles, urinary bladder, penis, navel, heart, chest, anus, rectum and intestine are
the places of apaanvaayu. It releases out the flatulence, semen, urine, stool, menses and
womb at proper time. Apaanvaayu controls the functions of nerves in the pelvic cavity,
rectum and large intestine. The voluntary actions of this region are controlled by somatic
nervous system. Because of this we are able to bear the pressure of urine and stool when
the circumstances are not in favour. The involuntary actions of this area are controlled by
the sympathetic nerves and para sympathetic nerves of the autonomic nervous system.

Cs)
