In the eastern world also, several philosophies about matter and element are prevalent
but generally all accept the elements as a part and basis of creation. Here, without going
into their history, it is comparatively more important to know how researchers of India
(rishi/munis) and Chinese philosophers have termed the infinite into five elements and
based their micro-form, a subject for treatment in Acupressure since they are the basis of
treatment.Here these principles have been mentioned in brief. In Chinese Acupuncture,
wood, fire, earth, metal and fire has been considered as five elements and these have
been made the basis of treatment. But in Indian scriptures and literature, earth, water, fire,
sky and air have been considered as five great elements.

In Ayurveda, however, this has been discussed a little differently and in a very
substantial manner. In Ayurveda, they are termed as dravya (element) and these five
elements have been placed in a definite sequence — akash, vayu, agni, jal and prithvi and
their functions and attributes have been also decided into common and specific forms.
Based on their functions and attributes, their identification and use has been done in different
ways. .
Three main principles of Ayurveda — cause (hetu), symptom (ling) and medicine
(aushadh) have been stated. Ayurveda is a treatment therapy mainly based on medicines
prepared from natural herbs. However, while Acupressure’s direct relation with Ayurveda
may not be apparent, yet every origin whether cosmos, body or universe or body organs
or their parts — up to minute level,all their origin, cause and symptoms has been made the
basis of study in Acupressure. In Acupressure, the medicine is God-given bio-energy,
which is divine and being a fragment of power of God, is all powerful and omnipresent.
Ayurveda being a collection of divine words is in itself divine and the use of its principles in
Acupuncture will positively mean an integration of divine principles and divine medicine in
the form of available points on the body. And this miraculous combination in Ayurvedic
Acupressure will make it the most powerful therapy in the world for treatment of diseases.
Only in a short period of time, Ayurvedic Acupressure has given wonderful results as a
proof to the world, and the efforts of Indian divine rishis and munis (researchers) has come
to save people from the agony of diseases in this kalyug (present world). To search the
methods, Maharishi Bharadwaj personally approached Lord Indra and received directly
from him the knowledge of Ayurveda. In turn, recited this knowledge to the Rishi Kumars
(young researchers) and then the knowledge was made available by several Ayurvedic
scriptures written by Sushrut, Kalhana, Charak, etc. for the redemption of humanity from
disease. By using Ayurvedic principles given in Charak Samhita and using therm in
treatment, hundreds of our colleagues of Sansthan are giving this book a very new and
useful form.

In Ayurveda, each element and matter has been defined by its common and specific
attributes. In Chinese Acupuncture, based on the five elements, detailed analysis has
