A few case histories on the basis of above clarification have been described below :
Case - 1 : A senior therapist of the sansthan has the probelm left eye pain, lightning
watering. Perhaps, due to walking in the sun, due to excessive heat his left frontal region
had been effected. He was treated on left hand’s small finger’s upper & lower phalanges 5
sms. In a few moments, symptoms subsided: Treatment Lf SF V/K phalanx 5 sms.
Case —2 : Rakesh Agrawal, 36yrs., 98 Zeroroad, Allahabad, ph : 2402612 He had problem
of constipation from childhood. Due to disturbed sleep, for 4/5 yrs, in left jaws lower part
due to nodes he had light pain & uneasiness always. The patient informed that his lower
eight tooth has been extracted. He has been having these problems since then. On
examination, his brain's left frontal & parietal lobe’s lower part, kapha regions was found
responsible for the ailments. Based on this diagnosis, left small finger's kapha phalanx and
index fingers kapha phalanx 5sms each as a chakra was put. This was done on 14.4.04.

Lf SF K palanx-5 sms

Lf IF K phalanx-5 sms
After a weak’s treatment, on 21.4.04 the patient reported sufficient relief in all symptoms
along with long constipation problem. The patient also reported that despite eating a lot of
antibiotics he got no relief in nodes and his facial happiness was positive towards the
Sansthan’s treatment.
Case — 3: Rajeshwar Prasad, 64 yn, New Delhi, ph. 22773406. The patient had paralysis
in Janauary 04 that developed weakness in right leg & foot, tingling, aversion to cold walk
on the left side and slow urination after paralysis attack. For the above symptoms, the
patent's left hand’s small finger and middle finger’s kapha phalanx were chosen, 5sms
applied:

Lf SF K phalanx- 5sms

Lf MF K phalanx-5sms
On 15.4.04, after, one two days treatment started on 13.4.04, the pateint reported 90%
relief in tingling in the left leg & arm & face, 90% relief in urine flow.

1
Case 4- Priyanshee, love, Sarnath, Varanasi.
His medical report was as follows:-

1) CT Scan (head) 5.2.03 Reduced density of white matter Leuko encephalopathy. Both
lateral ventricles are dialated with prominent temporal horns (left more that right)
Asymetrical obstructive hydrocephalus.

271
