ahd shfeeraPacss waist SOM! FRYVAT Fa VOGT 11311
(Shlok-3, Pg.-4 (H))
To know the purpose of long life, its secrets and science, maharishi went to the lord of
lords (Indradev), the eminent lord and the one who seeks goodwill for all.
sern f& aemikpargde somafes| stare PrRadeareraPast q gata: 11411
aPaai srapen: wfete = dae) aciotee axgrorereresyoRrrd 11511
(Shlok-4,5, Pg.-4 (H))

This entire ayurvedic knowledge was first of all received word by word by daksh
prajapati from lord brahma; thereafter Ashwini kumars and lord indra received this
knowledge. Later, on the perusal of rishis, maharishi went to lord indra to receive the
ayurvedic knowledge.

faeryen gar th: migieraniRory! advarneaassered sagan] 11611
aal Weerqer yeepes Feta: | we: Qoaeaio: oad rae: BA 11711
(Shiok-6,7, Pg.-5 (H))

When the time came, which created hinderences in the tapp(meditation), fasting,
studies, saintly livelihood and other holy tasks of the common satvic people ( as they
started getting sick); the rihis collected in the valley of Himalayas to find/ discuss a solution
for it.

qanierd aa gai ap: seni) emflormennahed yey 11151
thread: Aare shfaerea al migyet aqearomrara wera 11161 |
B: Tas Toa FegaeaT CaM: | Ser a IR a eqyeafraaga 111711
W aeafe BAT aeTaaAAY: | (Shiok-15,16,17 Pg.-6 (H))

The term ‘purusharth’ is categorised into dharm(duty), arth(money for livelinood),
kaam(pleasures/luxury) and moksha(salvation). It is for purusharth that the human being
is created for;(none other species can attain purusharth).To attain purusharth, the basic
factor is aarogya(good health). Diseases create hinderences in achieving purusharth and
also makes one devoid of lokic and alokic (this and the other world’s) pleasures.

Thus diseases are obstacles in achieving the four parameters of purusharth. What is
the solution to this? Such thoughts started in the meditative states of the rishis. They could
see the past , present, future conditions by their visions.

Thareafter they visualised to go into the abode of lord indra as he only can give the
solution to this problem.

@
