Tefoed aqeerasaraga ward 7 fate a qo coor of 112811
ara coerce cated faftenfecn:| Se oe arf shed aMeareacy 112911
(Shlok-28, 29 Pg.-14 (H))

Those rishis, divinely visualised the six components : 1. Samaanya(common),
2.vishesh (specific), 3. Gunn (properties) , 4.dravya (elements), 5. Karma(functions) and
6. Samvaay(combination) and attained happy and long life by adopting the ayurvedic
methods.

Tags: yuaray aa} dafaai we: | ead Gara areakeranfsery | 14311
(Shlok-43 Pg.-14 (H))

This Shastra , Ayurveda , which depicts the knowledge of life,is the most holy text i.e.
none other task is more beneficial than knowing this. This has been stated by the knowers
of the vedas and it is helpful for people in this life and also iri next lives. It is being described
now.

aera INK o zetad Prevsaq! caffe dates ad wfiffory 114611
(Shlok-46 Pg.-17 (H))

Mann (mind), atma(soul), sharir(body) are the three poles of one unit. Their
togetherness brings about the existence of the lok(cosmos/ jeev atma). All is established
within this cosmos; these three are the basis of the foundation .

Knowledge of Ayurveda is spiritual,sublime, liberating continuous without beginning &
without end. It reveals the knowledge of supreme i.e.there is nothing in the universe which
is not already in it(In a macro sense in the cosmos & in a micro form in human body); thus
the paramatma, the jeevatma & the Aatma, Ayurveda contains the entire special knowledge
ofall these. The starting of life and starting of disease etc.,all can be studied in detail through
Ayurveda and it is this knowledge that gives it such universal acceptance. In short, Ayurveda
can rightly be called the Residence of all therapies. Normally, Ayurveda is treated as a
therapeutical system. In Greek language ‘therapy means ‘service’. There is a connected
word-Phytotherapy ‘[phyto-'plant'] and therapia means ‘service’ i.e., it means service through
plants. In a larger sense it means that in addition to the medicinal value of plants, the
medicinal use of plants is also available. According to Hippocrates “let food be your medicines
and medicines your food.”

According to Aacharya Manfred M. Junius;

“Phytotherapy implied the concept of living in harmony with the entire plant kingdom
which provides us with oxygen, with wood for building and for making objects and materials

es)
