3)

Want a fert a oro genni | afore fier oF orf arcade 115211
(Shlok-52, Pg.-24 (H))

Karma(Function)- Karma or activity is the root cause behind all unions and
separations. Karma is dependent on dravya(element). The duty of doing is known
as karma/ function. This karma does not require any other medium for its activity of
uniting and separating.
For example, the main organ in the digestive system is the stomach in the body.
Enzymes secreted by the stomach combine with the food and they start dividing
the food into minute particles. Again after dividing, separate particles with common
function, combine and produces bolus. The entire product is called metabolism. It
has two main parts — catabolism and anabolism — which respectively perform the
activity of division and combination. Enzymes are elements. The entire activity is a
part of the digestive function of food which has three components — ingestion,
digestion and absorption. By metabolism, food is broken down into minute particles
and whole process of mixing is a part of the digestive activity which is due to the
functions of enzymes that is burning/digestion.
Attributes(Gunn)

erareh g Pade: Brot WO: 115111 (Shlok-51, Pg.-23 (H))
Attributes(Gunn)- The substance which is inseparable and dependent; the one
which remains inactive but still acts as the causative factor (for activities), is known
as Attribute(Gunn).
What remains in a substance/element and is the cause for an activity but in itself
does not participate in the activity i.e., the one which is inactive is known as the
attribute of the substance. For example: Lungs, stomach, heart or any other organ,
all are made-up of one or the other membrane. This is called the covering of the
residence (organ); it comes under the category of akash element. Among the other
attributes, softness is also an attribute. When in the aforesaid organs, some fluid is
filled then these organs due to their elasticity, take the shape accordingly. Thus, for
example, if the lungs membrane did not have elasticity then during inhalation and
exhalation of breath, expansion and contraction of lungs would not have been feasible
and they would have been damaged. Similarly, abdomen also appears like a rubber
bag when extra gas or water gets filled then instead of bursting it expands due to its
elasticity.

Go
