Attributes(Gunn) and Functions(Karma) of Elements
attributes soft, light, subtle, smooth, sound
Spec _ :
softness, porosity/ permeability, lightness
attributes light, cold, dry, rough, transparent, subtle, touch
a jah, cold, dy, rough, transp

| functions _| dryness, fatigue, thoughts/wandering, transparency, lightness

re hot, sharp, subtle, light, dry, transparent, radiance/colour

| functions _| burning, digestion, radiance, brightness, colour/complexion

ee liquid, slippery, cold, slow, soft, sticky, taste
fate

— moisten, lubricate, binding, softness, pleasantness

5. heavy, rough, hard, slow, stable, concentrate, gross, smell
metabolism, cohesion, heaviness, stability

Attributes have been described to be of two types — specific and common. Before

describing in detail, it is necessary to first know about this common and specific. In

Acupressure, element is the basis of treatment. It’s detailed study is the basis of

successful treatment by Acupressure therapy. In both Chinese Acupuncture and

Sujok Acupuncture, for the study of elements, the principle of yin-yang or homo-

hetero forces have been enunciated. In Ayurveda, however, without mentioning

them directly, common and specific has been mentioned which are similar to yin-

yang or homo-hetero.

4,5) Common-Specific(Samaanya-vishesh):
ada aderarti aad afew! erregraed war J 114411

(Shlok-44, Pg.-15 (H))

It is a universal truth that for the growth of all components (elements, attributes,

functions), commonness(samaanya) is the causative factor; and specifity(vishesh)

is the cause of destruction. The human body is connected/ related to both common

and specific attributes.

aripatcaan feteeg guecapa | qearefar fe anaes fereereg farrefa: 114511

(Shlok-45, Pg.-16 (H))

Common- is the cause of unity. Specific- is the cause of of separation. The property

of similarity is called common and its opposite nature is known as vishesh.

If some more wheat seeds are mixed in an existing bunch of wheat seeds, then to

separate them is almost impossible; because due to similar attributes/ properties,

3)

