The treatment has been proved to be very easy and effective, based on the common
and specific attributes and functions of an element and identifying them, based on
the corresponding body organ, sub-organ, limb etc. which is having the ailments. In
Ayurveda, all principles, diagnosis and way of treatment is holistic and this is
elaborated among all natural treatment therapies. Hence each attribute and function
of an element has been made the basis of diagnosis and treatment. In the chapter
on diagnosis (in this book), based on attributes and functions, analysis of disease
and treatment has been described in detail. The above mentioned 20 specific and
10 common attributes, word-wise, appear very simpie, but their use in treatment is
very effective which will be proved by the specific case histories. Perhaps, the
types of a disease can be infinite and so their cause will also be infinite, but studying
them in a subtle manner, imagining the ailment at a macro level, its knowledge can
be obtained. To know the causes of an ailment it is also necessary to know, where
its residence, time and method of treatment is. The utility of an element is based on
its activity. Activity is energy, this is present in every element in various forms, un-
manifested and integrated. This integrated concept can be called as the related
energy of the element which is present in the form of attributes and functions of the
element and is responsible for the activity of that element. The cause of a disease is
‘energy’and also ‘its absence’. In Ayurveda, a disease has been called as sadness.
In fact, absence of sadness is happiness itself which is an indication of good health.
Similarly, the nature of energy of each element is related with health of the body and
excess or absence of that nature creates disease.

Explanation of the twenty(20) specific attributes :

(1) Heavy and Light : The judgment of each element should be based on its
Lightness or Heaviness. At a first glance, the elements which appear thin or
thick are termed respectively as Light and Heavy. Actually, here this attribute
is not a measure of Lightness or Heaviness, but to judge the internal property
of the element - whether it is light or heavy. For example, a particle of sugar
and one particle of black pepper are called heavy and light respectively. So
eating heavy food produces heaviness in the body and eating light foods brings
slimness to the body. Another view is of a non-manifested relationship of father
and son which represents higher (heavy) and lower (light) energy. Earth and
Gyan (knowledge) are respectively light and heavy (knowledge is “heavy!!”).
Buffalo and intelligence are respectively Light and Heavy. So based on internal
assessments, treatment of an element on the basis of heavy or light is inclusive

G9
