(2)

of both physical and metaphysical. The same amount of treatment is needed
for an obese patient as is needed for a person with obese mind(dull). Perhaps,
it is possible to treat an obese person but it is difficult to treat a foolish person.
But in Acupressure, treatment of both is feasible.

Mobile and Stable: In everything, internal property of mobility or stability can
be identified in several ways. Actually mobility represents consciousness and
life where as stability represents inertness and rigidity. In other words, the
activeness and quickness of the brain and organs, represents the mental

State of the brain. Vayu has speed and ro!

(3)

Yay bina telat indir Tspiannnta wo
of stability. In Fire there is partly mobility and in Water there is partly stability.
Based on these attributes, treatment is feasible in a specific way. Thus in the
body each Element's speed - less or more - will denote the seriousness of the
ailment. Blood circulation - fast or slow - will present serious symptoms of a
disease; whereas in vomiting or diarrhea, main treatment is to stabilize the
movement of stool. And based on these qualities, serious diseases can easily
be treated. The movement of Human body and all joints / tissues is based on
motion (mobility); Sitting and lying down, is based on stability. Any movement
of head, hand and feet is a symptom of some disease. If on walking, legs do
not move forward, then this also indicates a disease. Any deficiency in mobility
of eyelids or pupil or in breathing, is indicative of some serious disease. Several
hormones secreted by ductless or ducted glands are mobile within the
circulation of blood. Due to every action and reaction, diseases appear and
the treatment by Ayurvedic Acupressure is therefore giving better results.

Cold and Hot: In Chinese Acupressure, among the eight fundamental principles
of treatment, the two fundamental principles are based on each element's
property of Cold and Hot. These two have been enunciated out of the 20
attributes. From scientific point of view also, a substance / element is
recognized from its clinical report qualifying it as acidic or alkaline which
indirectly reflects its Cold or Hot attribute. Each hormone and enzyme is mainly
accepted as Hot element; but even here some enzymes like Pancreatic juices
being of a cold nature have been classified in the Cold attribute. The attribute
of an alkaline substance is Cold. Although, every element has both cold and
hot present in it, yet based on its main attribute, an element is called Cold or
Hot. The two components of an attribute are complementary. Only due to this,
the two components ensure a balance and homeostasis of a unit. These
attributes are present in each element as manifested or un-manifested. Juices

e)
