(4)

(5)

(6)

secreted in the oral cavity or in the stomach are called Hot whereas the juices
secreted in the small intestines are comparatively Cold; those related to the
liver are of a neutral nature. If a cold attribute is in temperament, then in the
behavior a warm friendliness is a healthy sign. Hence cold in temperament
and lack of coldness in the behavior are disease symptoms and required to
be removed. Easily losing temper and then at the end declaring oneself as if
having an angry nature, oneself having fear of this habit, coldness in husband
and wife’s relationship, all these are indications of disease. Such type of
ailments can be treated based on these attributes of cold/hot by Ayurvedic
Acupressure. Thus both physical and metaphysical treatment is being done.
Dry and Slippery:Both these attributes are very important from physical and
metaphysical point of view of treatment. Normally, by merely touching the
skin, one can judge the sliminess/dryness and if it is more than normal, it
indicates an ailment. In normal course, a straight forward speaker is termed
as dry and a flatterer speaker is termed as slimy/slippery. The synovial fluid
present in joints comes in the category of lubricant; when this property is
affected then cracking sound comes from the joints. In the entire digestive
system, secretions from mucal membranes are essential to move the food
forward. Excess of lubrication is visible as mucous in stool; in absence of
this, roughness in intestines develops and sound comes, stool starts drying
and there is distension in abdomen; and symptoms of constipation appear.
Rough and Smooth: These attributes indicate rough / smooth property cf an
element. Smoothness is connected with lubrication and hence it clears
resistance. For example, Sattu (roasted gram flour) and water combine to
make the product swallow-able and this liquid is called Smooth. The dry flour
cannot produce Roti (chapati). Similarly, acne on the face makes it rugged
and so due to these properties, the utility of elements can be decided and on
the basis of this only, treatment protocols can be prepared. A compromising
type of person is not called a slippery person; this smooth character is due to
a nature of non resistant habit. Its reverse makes a person irritable and
uncompromising. Due to this ruggedness, crookedness of bones and of
persons’ behavior takes place.

Fast and Slow :Elements are recognized as aggressive or sober due to the
difference of fast /slow. For example, each acidic substance is violent and
fast and an alkaline element is slow in a chemical reaction. Especially for hot
elements, it is necessary to examine the attributes of fast /slow and on this
