(7)

(8)

basis, diagnosis and treatment is desirable. Due to aggravation of bio-
chemicals in the body, aggravation of itching in the skin is so acute that the
person becomes absolutely restless and even blood oozes out due to
scratching. For this, it becomes necessary to slow down each activity; thus
for reducing the heat of chemicals, in the respective meridians, Fire is to be
sedated and water acu-points are to be toned so that the excess of irritation is
reduced and by increasing water, it slows and the treatment becomes more
effective.

Subtle andGross: Subtle and gross are very important attributes of an
element. Each element is a combination of both subtle and gross. By
recognizing the inherent attributes of subtle /gross of the element, diagnosing
subtle / gross as required, and then giving the treatment accordingly, proves
effective. Each element is recognized by its form and activity. Body is gross
and Soul is subtle. Soul is the cause of vitality in every element. For example,
the form of Akash is expansive and being all pervasive, this vitality is present
in a subtle form. Physical is gross and metaphysical is subtle. When the ailment
of skin is to be treated, then Akash’s physical form is to be treated but if
Akash's metaphysical form is to be treated, then it would be based on Akash
element's attributes and symptoms.

Sticky and Transparent: According to Ayurveda, every element normally
bears clear / sticky qualities, but in water and earth, these qualities are especially
apparent. Secretions from every hole are full of clear and sticky qualities. For
example, watery sneezing from nose is a sign of good health of the person.
Normally, a person should sneeze once or twice daily but if it is less or more,
it will indicate some ailment of the lungs. Thick secretion from the nose is
sticky and it needs treatment. Similarly, while cleaning the nose and the eyes,
secretions of water and mucous is found. Sticky secretion is thick and
concentrated whereas clear secretion looks transparent. Mucous from the
eyes is due to two causes - local and the other due to distant causes. Infection
in the eyes and continuous secretion of mucous from the eyes may also be
due to infection in the reproductive organs which is responsible for the
reproductive power of a person. The attribute of healthy seminal fluid is sticky.
But when it is diseased, the secretion still is of sticky nature but dirty. Hence
for diagnosis and treatment, one should know about the secretions as sticky

and /or transparent. °
*

