(10)

bu e j Ily_t it ) a

predetermined attributes; so the quantity of hardness in earth element keeps
varying. Various small and big bones in the body are present in the form of
earth (parthiv) to balance its structure. But as 30 percent of water is present in
bones, so they are not so hard that they may lose their active nature. When
Parthiv(earth element) starts increasing in the bones, then Osteo(bone) cells-
increase and when the water element increases then osteoporosis occurs.
Therefore, soft / hard are such attributes whose balance assists in treatment
of diseases.

Dense and Rarefied : Identification of element is by their specific attributes
and in fluids, by their dominance of different specific gravities. Each attribute
of dense and rarefied are complementary. Based on these attributes, the
diagnosis and treatment is made easier. For example, a standard density is
known for the excretions from the various holes of the body like nose, ears,
mouth and eyes etc. Not only these, the density / concentrations of enzymes
and hormones have also been studied by our scientists. This dense or rarefied
property is indicative of disease. The reproductive tissue is normally dense; if
it is dilute or too concentrated, it is a disorder. The disease is known by the
fluid concentrations of the saliva, blood and ENT(ear, nose, throat) excretions.
The fluids can be converted from dense to rarefied and vice versa, by treatment.

Ten(10) common attributes :

(1)

Combination(Sanyog) : Each element originates independently but elements
in combination with other elements only ensure that the order of creation
continues. The basis of the entire creation is the combination of Bramha and
living being. According to Ayurveda, living being is a combination of body and
soul. in living beings, energy(vitality) manifests because of combination in
between body, sense organs, Mind and soul . Even though the entire universe
/ Body are of infinite elements and organs, yet each unit combines with another
to create the universe / body. According to the Eastern philosophy, on the
basis of this principle of combination(sanyog}, the main organs of the body
like liver, heart, kidneys, lungs and all the Yang organs like stomach, small
intestines, large intestine, gall bladder, urinary bladder etc. function together
in harmony; due to this body remains healthy. If even one organ’s unity with

