others, breaks then a chain of diseases start in the body. At the initial level,
some normal symptoms of a disease appear which look very ordinary, but
these deflect such a wide range of ailments which can be understood by a few
examples. At one place, the Eastern philosophy,on the basis of the combination
principle, considers the activeness and functional abilities of body for treatment
in a Holistic manner; the Western philosophy considers each individual's
organ’s activity and function as separate from the organ itself; for each organs
disease there are separate specialists and also for the related diseases and
this results in a patient taking expensive and multilevel treatment from several
specialist doctors; whereas in the Eastern treatment therapy, just one doctor
is capable of treating all the organs based on their ability and function; so
much so that each action-organ and sense-organs, having specific combination
with the brain, can be treated with just a single treatment of the organ, joint,
action-organs, sense-organs, endocrine- glands, body-system and also the
treatment of psychic and emotional diseases are possible. Due to the base of
God's blessings in Ayurvedic Acupressure, its treatment results are more
effective than by other branches of Acupressure. Combination (sanyog), is
such an attribute of an element that it has a specific place in every element.
Based on the thought that each atom or part of an element, due to combination
with each other, builds the body. Similarly, each component part of the universe
is helpful in the creation/ building of the gross / macro level. Be in a family,
society or nation, their structure is based on combination. If this basic principle
is accepted in the original form, then a person born anywhere in the world
cannot be different from another of any religion, caste or creed, born anywhere
else in the world. According to the Indian philosophy, the concept of Vasudhaiva
Kutumbakam- one whole world as one family - is based on this principle of
combination (sanyog). If we accept this principle of combination, then all
persons, in one or the other way, are connected to each other and are not
different from each other. Another example from mathematical science, the
primary numbers from 0-9, has been considered and are based on their
expansion as :

10, 11, 12... 19

50, 51, 52..

