(2)

composed of infinite elements but the basic ten numbers represent the ten
basic elements :

0 — Tam(darkness) 5 — Prithvi(earth)

1 - Akash(space) 6 — Kaal(time)

2 — Vayu(air) 7 — Disha(direction)
3 —-Agni(fire) 8 —Mann(mind)

4 -Jal(water) 9 - Atma(soul)

Thus, if even one number out of the 0 - 9 primary numbers, is separated then
the primary numbers become incomplete and further the sequence of their
permutation, combination is also upset and broken. If even one organ of the
body is removed, the body cannot remain healthy and the Organ will not be
able to retain its activity and it won't be possible to prepare permutation /
combination of the primary numbers. The infinite thought is a wonderful concept;
so when the entire universe and the body is infinite and manifested, then its
forms also will naturally be infinite and manifested. A person spends his whole
life in learning and gaining expertise in one or two subjects only; so in such a
situation to think of learning an infinite number of subjects makes him shaken
or continues to live a life of suspense assuming that achieving the goal seems
to be impossible. In this situation, in relation to infinity, a Ph.D or a post-graduate
person (learned only in one subject) is similar to an illiterate or a lesser educated
person(regarding all other subjects). How is it possible? In reply to this, the
concept of 10 origin principle is formulated by infinite thoughts. The question
is-will it then be proper to accept a single organ, like heart’s specialist, as a
Doctor? The diagnosis and treatment by infinite concept is an infinite thought
process and this precisely is the message of Ayurveda’s divine visions.
Infinite thoughts are essential for absolute knowledge and its education is
definitely possible in one’s lifetime. Therefore, on the basis of Tulyarthata -
correspondence principle, the 10 origin principle is being enunciated. As
mentioned earlier, the prime numbers can be expanded up to infinity and on
this very basis, the infinite can be studied. It is for this reason that the 10 origin
principle is all comprehensive and specific and it will be applicable equally in
all times, in all countries and in all types of studies. This is our belief.
Separation (Prithakatva): It is the rule of nature that when an element
combines with another element, then the absence of combination(sanyog)
factor, results in separation. If the body is created as a result of combination
with the soul, then it is also true, that its separation with soul makes the body
