(3)

lifeless. It is an eternal truth that combination is the cause of separation. The
soul has to be separate from the body. This concept is extremely useful for
both diagnosis and treatment and is an important subject in Ayurvedic
Acupressure. When a particle breaks, then one piece is separated from
another. Combination results in an activity of creation but during creation, due
to the property of separation of an element, some useful and some non-useful
substances get separated. The body wants to use the useful elements and
remove those which are not useful and these are excreted out of the body in
the form of waste and thus body ailment is relieved. In fact, if this attribute of
an element is recognized, then there is no need for surgery. God has created
a beautiful body with infinite components and cutting some organs and removing
them by way of surgery is against the sequence of nature. So by treating at
the initial stage, surgery can be avoided. By Ayurvedic Acupressure, treatment
similar to surgery can be done. In the soul of the foot, corn gives extreme
pain. It has been seen that by employing a few byol magnets, the corn
separates out of the body. Similarly, it has been seen that by Acupressure,
gall bladder stones also break down and is excreted. So much so that in case
of paralysis, some brain cells become infarct (inactive) but by applying
pressure/ magnets at some acu-points, the patient gets substantial relief. In
paralysis, the cells which become dead can't really be revived but with the
help of acu-points, momentum can be given to such cells to assist the secretion
out of the body so that active cells combine among themselves as a unit and
are re-activated. With this process, despite a few of the infinite cells become
damaged / dead, the body does not remain dependent on them and so in
paralytic patients, 80% to 90% recovery has been seen with the help of
Ayurvedic Acupressure.

In different organs of the body, especially in liver and pancreas, chemical
activity takes place continuously resulting in separation and combination of
smaller particles, out of the bigger ones. Every food material is continuously
being converted by bio- chemicals into amino acids, fatty acids and glycogen;
and due to this, toxins get separated and excreted and ions produce useful
specific bio elements. This clearly indicates that separation, combination and
division are extremely important attributes of elements.

Division(Vibhaag): As stated earlier while describing separation that attribute
of separation of an element is basically a repetition of division (vibhaag). First
an element divides into a molecule and then again into atoms. Existence of
