each element is not possible without these macro or micro particles. Our
complete body is also divided into units. Again each organ is also divided into
sub- organs, parts, cells etc. The structure of minute cells is possible only
due to this division attribute. An example of this is the body's skeleton system.
This system, at a macro level is made up of 206 bones and their micro division
is into infinite bone cells. Similarly, in Ayurveda, the blood circulation system
has been divided into 700 blood vessels and in heart, there are four chambers.
Again, according to the 10 origin principle, this is feasible due to the division
attribute that heart has four chambers, four valves, one Vena cava, and one
Aorta. The scientists have identified each coronary artery of heart and
obstruction in any of them can be fatal. Each element can be divided into
smallest part and this pattern of division has been described in the chapter on
regional treatment in this book. With the help of regional treatment, by each
toe of foot, treatment of every part of the body has been described. Actually,
the divide concept of regional treatmentis a gift of Sir Park Jae Woo to us and
we are confident that the whole world will be benefited by the blessings in the
form of knowledge given by our Rishis and Munis. (Thus, we can understand
that prithav means to separate while vibhaag means to divide).

(4) Method (Yukti): Yukti means medicine! In every treatment therapy, Yukti,
i.e., medicine has an important role. In allopathy, it is in the form of chemicals
and in Ayurveda itis in the form of herbs, roots etc. Whereas in Acupuncture,
it is neither the chemicals nor herbs/roots but it is that component of the body
which acts as medicine in which there is Bioenergy/ vitality. Acu Points of
soul and acu points of body are such medicines that are part of God and are
such energy points which produce effects,similar to those created by the
necessary chemicals and herbs/roots. In this form, acu-point being divine,

“are far more effective than any medicine in the world. In this universe, each
element is medicinal and this itself is Yukti. But this requires a proper purpose
and residence. According to Ayurveda every particle is medicine. In allopathy,
medicines are chemicals. But in Ayurvedic Acupressure, the wondrous
medicines are acu-points. These points on the body are like stars in the sky.
Similarly, every cell in the body is root of medicine and selection of important
cells is a form of contraction of infinity. This is a divine medicine; and when the
vision is divine and the medicine is divine, then no disease can be beyond its
reach.

(x3)
