From Prayag’s fertile land, the origin of Ayurvedic Acupressure in the form of
a great healing system, is such a Saraswati in which with the purity of Mother
Ganges and the depth of river Yamuna is intermingling. The way each particle
of Ganges water purifies the entire stream, in the same way this great medicine
by this Sansthan will provide an unbelievable and unique contribution for the
benefit of the entire world, which will enable thousands of volunteering therapists
to fight with the Kaliyug’s incurable diseases. As a proof of this, we have seen
ourselves, positive results in the treatment of dangerous and incurable
diseases like AIDS and DNA infected ailments. Dozens of throat cancer
patients, coming from Kanpur, received this treatment and declared this therapy
as a great medicine of the future.

(5,6) Distant - Near (Par- Apar): Although simple in speaking and listening, yet it
is a very important concept. Par implies ‘distant’ and Apar implies ‘near’. Earlier
it has been discussed that the infinite concept helps in attaining the knowledge
of both the cosmos and the human body and it has also been stated that
infinite units exist due to the combination principle of elements. By the help of
this combination principle, minute molecules combine to create the cosmos /
body! Keeping one molecule next to another and so on, the first molecule,
vertically in straight line, will be farthest to the last one but nearest to the last if
kept in circular manner. Similarly, in our personal lives; we treat our neighbours
like a close family member and are likely to be indifferent with a distant stranger.
With a balanced disciplined concept of Distant-Near, it becomes clear that
from one point of view what we consider distant, becomes extremely near
from a holistic approach. This results in a thought process which is a “great
formula’ in our lives.

(7,8) Number - Measurement (Sankhya- Parimap): !t is possible to measure each
element. Based on measurement and number, identification of an element is
an interesting subject. It is this attribute of an element which is an important
factor for diagnosis. According to scientists, the universe/ cosmos can be
known through the states of matter like solid, liquid and gas but according to
Ayurveda, it is known by the five elements and Time (Kaal), Direction (Disha),
Mind (Mann), Soul (Atma) - these nine elements and as an integrator of all
these nine - the tenth origin Darkness(Tam). So a total of 10 elements enable
one to seek / learn about the causative factors of origin. Such seekers of
cosmos are known as Bramhavetta. Therefore, in relation to the 10 elements,
the concept of Number and Measurement has great relevance. In science,
