there are instruments for measurement of solid, liquid and gas.Measurement
of space, speed of air, distance or direction of earth /water or smallest soul,
for all these subjects, the attribute of Number — Measurement are equally
applicable. To measure time, there is the unit from Age to Era and similar
principles have been decided for measurement of each element. How much
blood is there in the body?How much blood is produced per day in body? How
much tissues are created daily? etc have been stated. As a unit, the height of
our body measures from six to eight feet. The age of the body has been
determined in years. In Kaliyug, the age of human beings have been accepted
as 100 years. Similarly, every part of the body, i.e. each elements’ measurement
has been definitely decided in some form or the other. Every day, the time of
eating (morning — evening) twice a day and sleep according to age, for 6 to 12
hours has been standardized. Similarly, heartbeat has been specified as 72 -
76 beats/minute. Passing stool two times, urination 4-5 times for males and 6-
7 times for females, reproduction age up to 77 years for males and 55 years
for females has been specified. To know the identity of an element and its
diagnosis, the exact value and deviation from the standards, is to be known.
For example, if 4 liters of food is taken per day, 3/4th of it should be liquid form
and 1/4th solid. If this standard is observed and 3 liters of water is taken, then
kidney’s activity will not be adversely affected. If the quantity of water is
exceeded or reduced, then in both the situations, danger to kidney starts.
Taking lunch/dinner at times not as decided by the nature, invites us to the
world of diseases, which thereby become synonymous with life. So, from
9am to 12 in the day and from 6 to 9 pm in the night, food must be taken in all
conditions because between two meals, adequate time has to be given for its
digestion.

Biological clock: The time period from midnight to 8 am is for Vatt, from 8 am
to 4pm for Pitta and from 4 pm to midnight for Kapha, as has been defined. By
further subdividing into the Vaat time period from midnight to 4 am as Vatt-
Vatt’s time, 4 to 6 am as Vatt-Pitta’s time and from 6 to 8 am as Vatt-Kapha’s
time. 8 to 10 am as Pitta-Vatt’s time, 10 am to 2 pm as Pitta-Pitta’s time and
