(9,10)

thinking, reasoning and creative power. For food, Pitta is the ideal force whose
time is from 8 am to 2 pm. Those with poor digestion, if they take food in the
day from 10 am to 12, then it is the best time for them. Those with negligible
appetite and whose fire of digestive system has almost extinguished, for them
proper time for food is from 12 to 2 pm. Similarly, the time for Kapha-Pitta is
from 6 pm to 8 pm and for normal Pitta person, proper time for taking food is 8
pm to 12 pm. Kapha is indicative of contraction power, laziness and heaviness.
The period from 8 pm to 10 pm is most appropriate to initiate for sleep. In all
conditions, the period from 9 pm to 10 pm should be for sleeping. Similarly, for
all life activities, the Ayurvedic Biological clock should necessarily be used.
By deciding the element and Vatt, Pitta and Kapha, time for each activity can
be decided.

Practice -Habit (Abhyaas -Sanskaar): Practice and Habit are those attributes
which are present in element in non-manifested (invisible) form. With the help
of practice, habit of each element is decided whether it is physical or
metaphysical. In Ayurveda, diseases have been stated as of two types,
physical or mental. The physical diseases are related to the five elements and
mental diseases are dependent on Raj (materialistic) and Tam (evil). All these
have been described in the next chapter. Raj and Tam manifest mental ailments
and their absence produces Satva(divine essence). Absence of Satva
produces materialistic and evil habits. Mental ailments are based on human
weaknesses of lust, anger, arrogance, greed, jealousy, ill will etc. A continuous
practice of Satva and treatment on acu-points of Disha, Mann, Soul, one can
achieve control on these ill-natured/bad habits. According to Ayurveda, all the
elements from akash to Mind, are the workers/doers of Soul. A diseased mind
makes all the workers ill. Therefore, by a proper control of mind on sense-
organs and emotions, one can get rid of serious diseases.

For example, before her wedding, a daughter is made to practice domestic
chores. By daily practicing these homely activities, she gradually gets
transformed and occupies the place of a housewife after wedding. Ladies
without proper habit become the root cause of family problems, inner fights
