4) Saadhaka Pitta

5) Bhraajaka Pitta
(1) Ranjaka Pitta-

‘coorafer venta TAA BA, “LSTA! (Pg.-379 (H))

The pitta which provides colour to the ras/plasma developed by food, and converts to
blood is known as ranjak pitta.

‘dott Tea Waa AST ages | ferateror a Tor Tat TepeenTES A |
(Shlok-28, Pg.-556 (H-2))

In human beings , the vitality is produced by ahaar ras (food extracts). Due to this
vitality and the heat of pitta, the ras / plasma gets converted into rakta/blood.

In every human being, plasma becomes blood due to sharpness and by the colouration
of heat of pitta. Pitta that resides in liver and spleen, named as ranjaka fire (fire of colouration)
converts plasma into blood.

Fluid like plasma becomes red coloured, after reaching in spleen and liver. Blood
tissue is produced with the help of ranjaka pitta and some part of plasma tissue also.
According to modern researches, in embryo stage formation of blood takes place in liver
and spleen but after birth production of blood is in red bone-marrow of bones. External
substances, which are in plasma, take part in production of blood and collects in stomach,
liver and spleen.

Red colour of blood is due to red colour cells i.e. Haemoglobin, present in it. Main
substances which are helpful in production of haemoglobin are vitamin B-12, iron and
protein. Vitamin B-12, is present in food at raw stage, called as Extrinsic factor. For its
absorption through intestinal wall, a substance is needed, secreted by intestinal wall, known
as Intrinsic factor. If intestinal walls do not secrete intrinsic factor, the absorption of extrinsic
factor is impossible. Maturation of red blood corpuscles (R.B.C.) do not takes place if there
is deficiency of extrinsic factor in blood tissue and results in Microcytic Anemia.

Function of fire, of ranjaka pitta is different than the other functions of fire in the body.
Proper quantity of oxygen is needed for the other functions of the body but function of fire
of ranjak pitta is possible at that time when oxygen supply is minimum. At the time of
production of R.B.C. in bone marrow, circulation stops in R.B.C. of that place and due to
this oxygen minimises.
