Samvaay (Togetherness):
amartsyeranal speordtai qetia:| a feat aa fe xed a cafe gor’ 15011
(Shlok-50, Pg.-21 (H))
The inseparable property of the elements like earth etc with their energy/attributesis
known as samvaay or togetherness. This samvaay is a continuous property as
where ever there is dravya/ element, there will be its attribute, definitely.
For example-1.Curd-Earthen pot, 2.Cloth-thread, 3.Sticks-mat, 4.Water-coldness
The union of samvaay, attributes and functions in a dravya(element):
1. Akash(space) is an element. Its function is non-resistance and its attribute is
sound. Thus akash is the samvaay(combination) of its functions and attributes.
2 _avwuginein pee: cement. Its function is drying and attribute is touch. Thus vayu is
the samvaay(combination) of its functions and attributes.

3. Agni(fire) is an element. Its function is burning and attribute is radiance/glaze.
Thus agni is the samvaay(combination) of its functions and attributes.

4. Jal(water) is an element. Its function is cohesion/binding and attribute is coldness.
Thus jal is the samvaay(combination) of its functions and attributes.

5. Prithvi(earth) is an element. Its function is to solidify and attribute is smell. Thus
prithvi is the samvaay(combination) of its functions and attributes.

6. Kaal(time) is an element. Its function is to age/destroy the longivity and attributes
are occurrence of seasons, one, continuous and of vast expanse. Thus kaal is
the samvaay(combination) of its functions and attributes.

7. Disha(direction) is an element. Its function is to indicate directions as east, west
etc and its attributes are one, expansive and continous. Thus disha is the
samvaay(combination) of its functions and attributes.

8. Mann(mind) is an element. Its functions are analysis, thinking and determination
and attributes are oneness and molecular(subtle). Thus mann is the
samvaay(combination) of its functions and attributes.

9. Atma(soul) is an element. Its functions are to go and come, to rise and fail etc
and attributes are having no illness, no beginning/end, joy-sorrow, likes-dislikes,
duties etc. Thus atma is the samvaay(combination) of its functions and attributes.
