10.Tam(darkness) is considered as the tenth element by some philosophers. Its
existence is known as the absence of light.

As described above, each element's methodology of functioning, and at a micro-

level, each element's particles’ functioning are described in a prose form in the

Ayurveda that is true in perpetuity as a principle:

‘ag Saci qoenara sent onfertr waa: cenftr fF reameqyrTae
Tena apa ort aaeRreorrens at ai a afore a a
aaa aq GdPa aq oF, da Hdha act, aa Haha salto, Tat
para a wre: oem Sata a sara: aq WMeTaP A A He

(Shlok-13, Pg.-472 (H))
The elements (dravya) are not only active due to heir properties(gunn) but also
due to the effects of elements; effects of properties and the effects of both elements
and its properties; and the time/ moment when they come into action; the place/
residence where activity takes place; the techniques/ methods used and the purpose
of the activity — all this is called karm(function). The component involved is called
‘virya’ (hormones etc); the place affected due to it is called ‘adhikaran'(residence);
the moment when worked is called ‘kaal’(time); the way/method used is called
‘upaay'(technique) and the purpose fulfilled is the ‘phall’(result).
From the above it is clear that for treatment of a disease, first its diagnosis is
necessary. But even before this, it is very necessary to know all the facts like the
Kaal (time) when the disease started, where it started, which area it has effected,
and how much it has spread. In the aforesaid ayurvedic quotation, all these have
been indicated in just one principle. It is essential to discuss on this shloka. What
has activated the element and what has damaged it? Causes which have activated
it will themselves ensure their destruction. Each element, due to its functions(karma)
& attributes(guna), or due to the effect of both itself and its attributes, at that time
and at that particular place, the way and the purpose of their function is called the
elements’ Karma (function), and the means by which the elements’ function is
performed is called Virya and the area where they appear is called Adhikaran i.e.,
the area of its functioning; the time they function is called their kaal, the way it
functions is called method (Upaay) and the purpose to fulfill the function is called

@
