On this earth, Indian Ayurveda and Chinese Acupuncture are the two oldest medicinal
scriptures. These are the treatment traditions. These are deep oceans of knowledge whose
depth and width are non- measurable. In these several therapies, in the form of rivers,
have flown into. While there are no historical records available about their origin, yet both
the faiths have developed more or less in the same periods. Doth these have developed in
two distinct far away areas of the world. (Some academicians believe that Acupuncture
has been pure Indian therapy). From ancient times women wearing nose-pin & ear-piercing
and men wearing wooden foot wear [kharaon] are also proof of that belief.But detailed
research & treatment by this method has been mainly done in China and from here therapy
has spread to all over the world. Both the Indian and Chinese therapies are the result of the
spiritual knowledge of thinkers & researchers in the two countries which have enabled
their development century after century. The mighty Himalayas (abode of inanimate spiritual
power) acts as a convenor for the two Nations & the two therapies. Acupuncture, like
Ayurveda, is also made up of two words-‘Acu’ & puncture. Acu means needle and ‘puncture’
means to pierce. Acupuncture balances vitality or energy of body through acupuncture
points present on the body‘s acupuncture meridians. This tradition is considered mainly as
Chinese heritage. Both Chinese Acupuncture & Indian Ayurveda are based on similar
fundamental principles which will be studied in subsequent chapters in this book.Detailed
studies & description of the principles of Acupuncture have been made in several books
already published by the sansthan. Special discussion is done in this book on the principles
of Ayurveda.

Sri. Robert Svoboda & Aarneeley have mentioned the important specialities of both
traditions, which is very important :

“At the heart of both of these great healing traditions is a world view which sees man
and nature ag inextricably linked. From this perspective each elucidates its own
understanding of health, meaning of disease and journey from illness to health, both
employing analogies to the forces and manifestation of nature to express their views.
These insights were carefully refined, systemized, clinically verified, orally transmitted
and later recorded in writing contained within the written tradition of both systems are
the experiences of countless physicians and patients which serve today as an immense
store house of knowledge.

es)
