result (phall). In this manner, it has been clarified in Ayurveda that for each elements’
activity, several components are responsible; such a detailed and precise
explanation is not feasible in any other science except Ayurveda. With respect to
an elements’ activity to function, brief points are indicated below:

Identification of element:

Dravya(Element)

Gunn(Attribute)

Dravya-Gunn(Element with its attributes)

Time of activity

Place of activity

Purpose of activity

For example, among all the systems present in the human body, digestive system
is the most important system. Its components, from oral cavity to the rectum are
lips, tongue, pallet, oropharynx, stomach, duodenum, liver, gall bladder, pancreas,
lleum, jejunum, caecum, and several parts of large intestine. Each component has

ePapons

several well-defined functions. “he coordinated activity of all these components
makes the digestive system healthy; with a healthy digestive system all other body
systems remain healthy and thereby the body can remain healthy. Actually, the
digestive system is the production system for post natal energy. This system
produces each tissue from blood to semen which is most important for the structure
of the body. Let us analyze, just one component of this complete digestive system-
the stomach - from the element and its activity point of view.

A patient has severe gastritis and ulcer in his stomach. The stomach is J - shaped
rubber bag like, and is formed from three membranes and in between are some
important secretions of several types of enzymes. If the stomach membranes
develop adhesion, then their contraction ability starts vanishing and rate of secretion
of enzyme slows down or due to hyper activity of membranes, secretion of enzymes
greatly increases. The function of these enzymes is to kill the microbes and toxins
in the body. In addition to the microbes, these also damage the stomach memb-anes
and ulcers are produced. Due to less secretion of enzymes, several ailments occur
which include constipation and even cancer. Here the creation of all tissues, like

Gd
