Chapter - 4
Ayurvedic Ten Elements (Dravya)

The shlok related to the ten origin concept of Ayurvedic Acupressure is :

adhraen 7: oral ena cereve:| Shad deri wed, PRP xra 114811
(Shtok-48, Pg.-18 (H))

Akash(space) etc are the Five elements (akash, vayu, agni, jal, prithvi) and atma(soul),
mann(mind), kaal(time) and disha(direction) are the collection of nine dravyas. This group
of elements is classified into two -1. Sendriya (dravyas with indriyas/ sense organs) are
called Chetan (living) and 2. Nirendriya (dravyas without indriyas/ sense organs) are called
achetan (non living).

Here all the elements have been divided into living and non living. This group of elements
appears to be as stationary (sthavar) and mobile (jangham). The indriyas/senses and
physical body are non living ; they become Chaitanya(living) , when in union with the soul.
The indriyas are the medium to attain knowledge. Thus it can be clarified as — the atma as
sadhak(one who meditates/controls), indriyas as sadhan(medium) and knowledge as
sadhya(to be known); these exist in this mannar in the human body. For example, the
potter is the person who umesazasimuay Tavroundjpase}stickyinreaayeteto|make pois!

The knowledge of soul is attained through its union with indriyas; if indriyas are diseased
or not in union, the liveliness (chaitanyata) is not known. Thus, an element is known to be
living , only when itis in union with soul else a sendriya/living is also dead and nirendriya/
non living is as usual dead like.

The atma/soul is all pervading hence it has a continuous relation with each element.
Thus, all elements may not be considered as living, as clearly mentioned — sendriyam
dravyam chetanam. The existence of knowledge in elements is what makes it living and
this is possible only by the involvement of eyes and other indriyas. Hence it has been

clearly stated that though the non living are in union with atma/ soul, but due to lack of
indriyas/ senses, they are termed as non living.
erat qafaat gf: raciee: Gere: | oT: slew:
(Shlok, Pg.-19 (H))

After the elaboration of elements , now their properties are discussed here. These
properties are — heavy etc , budhi/intellect, prayatna/effort, par/far etc. Sartha= the
properties of akash etc like shabd/sound, s=><z igi 5
