1) Space element (Akash):
AgeRAMENagraenctas, ay aaa ieereraracher | |

(Shlok-11, Pg.-471 (H))

The elements having the properties of 1. Mridu/softness, 2. Laghu/light, 3.sukshma/
subtle 4.Shlakshn/smooth and 5.shabd/sound are known as akash/space elements. By
the intake of such elements, the properties like softness, porosity and lightness are produced.

According to Ayurveda, space is an important element having a special place. It’s
energy is sound and it’s specific attribute is non-resistance ( Apratighaat ). The specific
attribute of Akash are (mridu) — Softness, (laghu) - Lightness, (sukshma) -Subtle,
(shalakshan) - Smooth. Akash’s functions are (mardav) - Shapelessness and (saushirya)
Permeability. In the physical world, Akash is synonymous with sky but this is only partly
true. Despite being the smallest, Akash’s expansiveness is the maximum compared to the
other elements. Akash can also be an equivalent to space, which in English is compared
to space, holes, pores. In this form , Akash can be termed as a group and multitude of
holes. F

The identification of Akash element in this physical body is according to its attribute
and functions and can be done in the following two ways: -

i) On the basis of covering of Body, organ, sub-organ, body-parts
ii) In the form of resistance / obstruction in the several types of cavities

Skin of the whole body is like a cover in the form of Akash. Diaphragm divides the
body into two segments. Peritonium is called the covering of thoracic and the abdominal
cavity; in peritonium, all organs are present in well- organized manner. Again in the thoracic
cavity the main organs - lungs and heart are covered by serous membrane. These coverings
secrete a Smooth fluid which saves these organs from any resistance during the contraction
or expansion and assists in their activity. Due to this fluid, the organs experience minimum
friction enabling them smooth functioning. In treatment by this therapy use of this knowledge
is very important and necessary. For example, lung’s covering is called Pleura in which
there are three coatings of serous membrane which mainly have fluids. When this fluid
reduces, then due to friction, Fire increases and swelling takes place; this is called
inflammation in pleura. In allopathic treatment, when this fluid increases then it is known as
Pleurisy, the fluid is to be removed by surgery but in Ayurvedic Acupressure, there is
simple and effective treatment of both these fatal diseases.

Heart also has a covering called Pericardium. The importance of heart is too well
known in human life. If and when the heart becomes inactive, death can come; as a guard
of the heart is Pericardium. Pericardium also has three layers: Endocardium (innermost),
myocardium (middle) and Pericardium (outermost). Problems in the fluid between these
layers causes serious diseases like pericarditis, myocardial infarction etc and for treatment
of these ailments the respective meridians have an acu-point of Akash element.

Organs like Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, Duodenum, Gall bladder, Stomach, Small
Intestines and its parts, Large Intestine, Appendix, Stomach, Rectum, Urinary bladder,
Ovary, Prostate, Kidneys, etc are situated in the abdominal cavity and these have in some

3)
