form or the other, three layers of mucal membranes surrounding them called coverings.
These membranes form walls of these organs whose thickness is up to 2 - 4 mm. When
the cells of these walls loose direction then these walls gradually become inactive from
active and the number of healthy cells rapidly decreases, and unhealthy cells increases,
This is called Metastasis. If this is not treated in time, it may lead to cancer. Stones in Gall
bladder, kidney and urinary bladder may not be a cause of serious worry but in their
coverings- which are present in the form of mucal membranes, if the inactive cells have
increased, is a cause of worry.

The treatment is possible by using acu points, in the respective meridian, with the
combination of Akash element with the other Elements. Research is going on successfully
in this area. Earlier, Classical Acupuncture was being employed all over the world for
relieving pain and joint ailments and other simple diseases but now with the use of EAV,
founded by Germany's Dr. Voll’s Electro Acupuncture, Sujok Acupressure founded by
Korea’s Professor Park Jae Woo and now Ayurvedic Acupressure, positive results even
in serious diseases are a gift of the divinity.

The main area where cancer develops in human body are uterus and its sub-organs
cervix, prostate, liver, gall bladder, pancreas, stomach, different parts of intestines, rectum
etc. Here cancer starts with the development of deformation in their coverings. Gall bladder
wall thickness, urinary bladder wall thickness etc are the formation in the covering itself
that causes the growth of the disease by and by.

Combination of Akash with five elements / substances:

In the principle of combination, an element combines mainly with the one element and
only partly with other elements. The element with which, it mainly combines, it adopts the
energy of that element. Akash element does combine maximum with Vaayu (air) element
but it does not imply that Akash’s does not combine with others. It is this concept that can
be used in controlling and treating serious ailments.

Akash has a minimum activity . But is greatly combines with Vaayu, and creates a
biological force i.e. VAAT, their energy sound and touch, are being mentioned in their
physical form. Akash Element is present in physical form as covering and holes. The
covering in the entire body is in the form of Skin. By the mere touch of the skin of organs -
sub organs of the entire body, all the Elements become active. So though, disease arises
due to inactivity of element, the disease is relieved by these organ’s mere touch; only their
connections are to be identified. A new born infant's touch with mother's breast provides
instant feeling of motherhood to the lady. A touch by hand produces vibration in the form of
Vaayu (breeze), in the whole body. It is this - the contact of Akash and Vaayu - is called
combination. Two opposite relationships - substance / element - male / female’s embrace
- is acombination of Fire (fire) and Akash. When the parents touch their child (whole body)
with love, then the latter's entire body's consciousness becomes calm and peaceful. This
is a contact of water and Akash. When nodes appear on any specific location of the body
in the form of fibroids, nodules etc, that part of the body appears Parthiv / stony (as if with
pebbles). This is a contact of Akash with earth. If their is imbalance of chemicals in blood
