vessels, the skin gets itchy, burning, different types of spots etc. and these are examples
of combination of Akash and Fire element. Dermatologists have diagnosed various skin
diseases and successful treatment of all these have been possible by knowing them to be
due to combination of Vaayu and Fire etc. Boils in the body also indicate combination
between Akash and earth. There are several such holes (Akash ) in the body, where
diseases are produced according to time by touch. Untimely and illicit contact (touch) can
be a curse for society. So Time has a wonderful relationship with Akash. This can both be
a blow for a curse and if Akash is unable to identify Time, then the person can become
directionless. It is Akash only which controls character building. Mind is the emperor of
body, skin is its partner; and opposite combination will result in a maid’s child but a pure
character will produce an emperor. Therefore, the identity of Akash Element work is not
only essential for character building but also implicit and necessary. When organ unlike
appendix, uterus etc are removed by surgical operation, the vacant space is Akash Element,
and by reducing it, it is filled by Parthivi element as if by a skilled worker i.e., 1 sedate 5
tone. With this successful treatment, organs can be created in human body. Such a
sensation and feeling has been experienced in several patients. Thus, with the Sanyog of
Akash Element with different elements, treatment of several diseases can be done in various
ways.

Here, based on Vaayu’s connection, touch has been made a basis for Akash’s
analysis. Actually, the sequence of creation is not possible without combination ; Akash
being the fundamental Element for its appreciation and analysis, dependence on Vaayu
Element and its energy touch is an essential and are unavoidable. Here it is necessary to
critically analyse the energy of Akash Element. Body or its organs / sub-organs, all have
a language, a voice. If the thickness of membrane of an organ increases, the latter's flexibility
reduces and the organs action of expansion and contraction get effected which results in
some sort of sound from them. And it is this sound which gives information of some disease
and health. After eating food and feeling contended, one burps twice, and this sound indicates
a satisfactory reaction. But if the covering of stomach has some ailment, and the frequency
of sound changes and comes several times, then this sound will indicate some ailment.
Similarly, if the coordinated action of large intestine and gall bladder is adversely affected
and wind passes with sound, Jungs getting affected and continuous sound of groaning, and
liver getting affected and fits of anger in loud voice, all these sounds are related with energy
of Akash i. e. sound. Hence sounds or word that emanate from the body are indicative of
ailment or health.

Akash’s Element’s physical form: -

Various types of holes or groups of holes or space are present in the body for
movement of elements and tissues. Whenever some resistance and construction occurs
in these holes / pores, then treatment of Akash Element becomes essential. In Ayurveda,
of the infinite nine main holes have been specified through which Prana(vital-force or bio-
energy or energy) and chetna/conscience is received and excreted. Their movement in
the physical world, whether the Combination is physical or metaphysical, is through these
holes. In relation to the body, these holes play the maximum contribution. These holes are

