two Eye holes, two Ear holes, two Nasal holes, one Oral Cavity, one Reproductive hole
and the Excretory hole.

All the ten common attributes of all the elements and the Tissues, functions through
these nine main holes. When their function is not properly in direction, then a disease
starts and so in such ailments, (disha) - direction - energy’s treatment becomes essential.
For example any obstruction in excretion of urine / stool causes upset in the body due to
some distortions in the structure of the respective hole resulting ina Akash element getting
effected. Therefore, in the meridians of Akash element, in addition to the Direction and
other energies, a protocol can be decided for treatment of even serious diseases. For
example in the Creative Hole’s covering i.e., the Endometrial wall has thickened, then on
the joint related to the Hole, energy of Akash element, is to be sedated, if the menstrual
cycle is delayed then treatment of Time, and if there is heavy or scanty menstrual flow then
treatment of fire will be effective. This Creative hole if termed as the repository of the entire
world consciousness, of human existence and reproductive hole, then it won’t be an
exaggeration! But the disappointment is that the disease also enters through this hole;
since the one which is powerful and creative, it is at the same time equally destructive —
this is nature’s message! Due to this great Hole, a person's thinking, physical strength,
consciousness, intelligence, development and several other views of persons get effected.
Both males and females are disturbed, physically and mentally, due to diseases of this
great-hole like Arthritis, Skin ailments, tiredness, lack of Energy, reduced eyesight, hair
fall, cervical pain, hypertension, headache, Sciatica etc. All female diseases in the body,
from beginning to end, even up to cancer, are due to this great - hole. The covering of this
hole is called Endometrium which has three layers and they have several vessels where
from time to time through secretion, cleaning of the whole body takes place. Treatment of

ailmpantednarAdtAanrninc ditwe Way

: nity distortions in the structure like a thickening causes

reduced elasticity and vibrations become minimum, resultng in movement, speed and
energy getting reduced. In such situation each and every cell has almost died and energy
vanishes and becomes senseless. Healthy cells function. after analysing the good or bad
state of body and unhealthy cells due to loss of energy become directionless and are
responsible for even cancer like disease. Mostly, in women uterine-cancer is due to the
covering of the reproductory hole getting affected. This can be treated by tonification of
Vaayu and Fire and sedating Disha and Akash on the Akash’s Elements vertical meridian
on the reproductive hole’s finger. If fibrosis starts then earth element will have to be sedated
and if there is a cancer then to improve the patient's mental state, it would be necessary to
treat Mind acu-point also.

Hence, Akash Element has been identified on a broad scale as a element; and this
element is visible as a covering, membrane, skin, space and sky. For recognising the
existence of this element and to gain complete knowledge about this element, the attribute
of this element of - sound and its functions non-resistance - are necessary to be clearly
understood. On this basis, the use of Akash Element has been done for treatment of
different diseases which will be apparent from various case histories / disease protocols.
