2) Vayu Element (Air) :

aypicrwerrferegenah pagar arent, af tenenPftrardsrecmaaaattr
(Shlok Pg.-474 (H))

The elements which have the properties like- 1.Light, 2.Cold, 3.Dry, 4.Rough, 5.
Transparent, 6. Subtle, 7. Touch , are known as Vayu elements. Their intake increases
dryness, fatigue, enhances thought process, transparency and lightness.

Continuous mobility is the nature of this world; therefore, it is called “Energy”, it means
something which is continuously moving can produce energy. Constant vibration, pulsation,
and going on moving is life. Life is named as movement. Movement provides harmony in
life which results in zest. As opposed to this, absence of movement and harmony is termed
as disaster. Rhythm and non-rhythm respectively represent life and death. The question is
which element is responsible for providing mobility, pulsation and harmony in life? Actually,
Vayu is really that element which is responsible for the mobility and vitality of entire world.

In Yajurveda, primarily only three elements have been enunciated in which the first is
Air (Vaayu) and it is called life. The second is Fire(Agni) and the third is Water (Jal). Due to
these three elements only, the creation of universe has been considered possible. The
other two elements, Space (Akash) above and Earth (Prithvi) below as coverings have
been termed as sub — elements. Of all these, Vaayu element is the very first i.e., the First
Element and considered synonymous with life.

According to Ayurveda, in the sequence of five elements, after Akash, Vaayu element
has been counted whose attributes are Laghu (light), Sheet (cold), Ruksh (dry), Khar
(rough), Vishad (transparent), and Sukshma (subtle/micro) and its functions are Ruksha
(dryness), Glani (exhaustion), Vichar (thought), Vishadata (transparency), and Laghavta
(lightness).

Vayu's energy is Sparsh (touch). Main attribute of Vaayu is mobility and by this
activity, movement is produced. In daily routine, action like crying, laughing, singing, eating,
swallowing, spitting, coming, walking are controlled by Vaayu. ‘Beginning’ or efforts for any
action are possible only due to Vaayu.

Among Vayu’s attributes ‘ dryness’ or ‘ roughness’ becomes apparent by just looking
at the person. If in the body, Vaayu is in excess, then the body will be thin, rough, absence
of shine and softness of hair, will be visible. In those people feeling of lightness in the body
is felt. Vaayu’s attributes being subtle, it is capable of entering anywhere and it is not
possible to stop its flow. Normally, Vaayu’s attribute is ‘Cold’, but it changes according to
the medium. To give dryness is also attribute of Vaayu. Vaayu brings lightness to fluids
due to its own lightness. Vaayu’s energy is touch. The ‘feelings’ in the physical world are
due to Vaayu.Touch provides energy. Energy makes every substance functional. Every
Element with its energy can become active only after it comes in contact with Vaayu's
energy. ‘Voice’ also emerges due to Vaayu. The function of eyes to see, is also only due to
Vaayu. All the action organs ‘(Karmendriyas’), perform their actions due to Vaayu. The
reproductive organs and the excretory system too are motivated by Vaayu. Digestive
system, Circulatory system, Nervous system, Excretory system etc and the body system
