inside the body are motivated by Vaayu. Thus, Vaayu has infinite functions. Any problem
or obstruction to the functions, Vaayu gets upset causing ‘Dosh’, which is responsible for
all acute/chronic diseases.

Vayu’s attributes/function can be defined based on the following points: -

1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)

8)
9)

10)

1

12)

13)

Vaayu supports the body mechanism and its organs.

Vaayu is the controller of all the right / wrong efforts.

Vaayu inspires Mind. Vaayu is responsible to make Mind indecisive. Vaayu diverts
the Mind in any direction it likes.

All sense-organs are lead and inspired by Vaayu. In the absence of Vaayu, eyes
cannot see, nose cannot smell.

To activate and to create impulse in tissues -plasma, blood, skin, adipose, bone,
the bone marrow, reproductive tissue (sperm/ova) - their functions takes place
due to Vaayu.

Vaayu unites body organs, sub-organs.

Vaayu activates voice.

The sound and touch senses are because of Vaayu.

Joy and Enthusiasm originate from Vaayu. The required attitude for any work,
like enthusiasm, feelings etc. are established by it. In absence of Vaayu, completion
of work is difficult. Basically, Vaayu is responsible in a different Manner, for
beginning of any work, function or activity.

Vaayu encourages fire to burn. Vaayu removes all toxins from the body. Makes
Subtle from Gross; Light from Heavy; it has the power to evaporate the water;
power to break the earth or stones into pieces. In medical science, activity to
break any substance, is called the catabolism. For producing food juices, function
to break the food particles, are performed only by Vaayu and Vaayu makes the
bolus move forward in the gastro intestinal tract.

Secretion of enzymes and the function of peristalsis of bolus from one place to
other are done by Vaayu. Purification of toxins by disintegrating or drying is done
by Vaayu only. From treatment point of view, this is very important.

Excretion of toxins and waste is done by Vaayu only. Through the means of, the
production / excretion / conversion / distribution of all tissues, sub-tissues and
waste is executed by Vaayu.

Vaayu assists in shaping foetus in the womb. This principle has useful importance
in treatment therapy. Any distortion of foetus in the womb, treatment of Vaayu /
Akash elements will be essential. In thousands of skin disease patients, this
principle has been found very successful. In distortion of body shape due to
Eczema, Psoriasis, Small pox, Chicken pox, Pustular rashes, Nodular
manifestation etc, successful treatment is done by Vayu.

Prana, Udan, Saman, Vyan, and Apan all these are Vaayu’s soul.
