14) When Vaayu is upset, several ailments occur and the body becomes deceased.
Upset Vaayu harms strength, colour, texture,life with happy living etc, destroy
the foetus,or sense-organs, creates deafness, dumbness, lame etc. It does not
allow the mind to become pleasant but makes it fearful, sorrowful, timid, mournful,
etc and even a destroyer of life.

15) It is the Vaayu that holds the Earth and ignite the fire. The way Vaayu holds the
earth, in the same way Nabhi (navel) holds the body. Whenever Vaayu is upset,
the Earth like strong body's balance will be upset. In that situation Vaayu becomes
the originator of heart disease and brain disease. Therefore by placing a Chakra
magnate with the centre as South Pole (yellow) at CV8, the body balance can be
restored and body can be relieved from the ill effect of Moon/ Planets / Nakshatra's.

16) Generation of clouds and then creation of rain etc are the work of Vaayu.

17) Sprouting of massive trees is the act of Vaayu only. The creation of hard nodes
on the skin of the body is Vaayu only.

18) Vaayu causes the seasonal changes. Vaayu is responsible for commencement
of menstruation in time. If the commencement keeps delaying, then Vaayu points
should be stimulated on the meridians of reproductive system and the brain.

19) Vaayu does the function to decide the quantity of tissue.

20) Trees and plants growth, ripening, saving from decay (by dryness) is possible by
Vaayu.

21) Vaayu is the doer of problem free activities.

22) Initiation / Interest in activities is the function of Vaayu.

23) Ferocity of Vaayu uproots even huge trees, destroys hill tops and through high or
low tide affects the sea. In water bodies, waves are created by Vaayu.

Diversion of river flows and reversing their flow becomes possible by the action
of Vaayu.

When wrathful, Vaayu can change the direction of blood and change the direction
of the body. Ruptures of veins, paralysis etc is possible only due to Vaayu. Vaayu
can create conditions like earthquake; eruption of the volcano becomes possible
and similar conditions in the body can also be created by Vaayu.

24) Thunder of clouds and their clash is possible only due to Vaayu. Due to agitated
Vaayu , alean and thin person becomes a criminal trait because of the excitement
and opposed to this, depression is 7!-7.suutre'(o vaayoriricrrnvesg‘olvening on a

fish, frogs, pebbles, hail, stones etc from the sky are possible only due to Vaayu.
25) The upsetting of seasons is alone done by Vaayu. Rain during winters or during
summers etc also is such situations for which Vaayu is responsible.
26) For the speed of several epidemics (cholera etc), Vaayu only is responsible.
27) Destroyers of the four Yuga, are clouds, sun, fire and Vaayu has a specific role in
creating this.
28) Due to enraged Vaayu, seeds do not convert into flowers and fruits. Some female
do become pregnant but due to multiple abortions, remained devoid of a
motherhood; its simple treatment is to tone the Vaayu element and sedate Akash
