element on the meridian of uterus, i.e., (27, 11). Here it is necessary to activate
Vaayu for forming the seed in fruit and Akash is the repository of Vaayu. It is true
that with the use of these too simple points such a major treatment is possible.
29) When male and female are unable to procreate, then it is called Primary Infertility.
In such cases of males/females having inadequate Vaayu in their reproductive
system, in that meridian, in the Mind (as controller) related meridian, toning of
Vaayu (2) and sedating Akash(1) or Kaal(6) is required to be done.
30) The nature of Vaayu is Sparsh (touch) and Shabd (sound). Whether hearing
capacity is low or deafness or any other hearing ailment, successful treatment
can only be done through Vaayu.
In the joint of important bones of the body, tendons and ligaments present there,
provide necessary energy and movement to the joint - these are functions of
Vaayu.
Due to an ailment of the hip joint, a person is unable to sit and get up, or if due to
a problem of the knee joint, if a person has problem of flexing or bending the legs,
then treatment has to be given on Vaayu on the respective meridian. Due to the
lack of synovial fluid in the knee joints, bones crackle; in such a case of synovial
fluid (sticky or slippery) which is created due to a combination of water and earth,
and is able to reduce Vaayu in the joint, so for treatment in such cases,
simultaneous treatment of Vaat and Kalph will be done as follows:(1, 21 , 4, 5) .
32) The origin of planets and the planetary movements are all due to vayu. The
measurement of the grahas can be done by the four finger measurement on the
head regions and the depth of disorders are known thereby. Detailed description
will be presented later on.

It is clear that in Ayurveda, the role of Vaayu is most significant, synonymous to
divine. Vaayu is considered as the originator of all human beings and also their destructor.
Vaayu only is the cause of both happiness and sadness. It is the creator of all Tantras
(techniques) like death, Yam, Niyanta (controller), Prajapati (perceptor), Aditi, Vishwakarma,
Vishwaroop etc. It can overcome any hurdle and be similar to all pervasive, all powerful
and similar to divinity. In the field of treatment, when such situations are met with, then with
other elements, treatment of Vaayu Element should be done.

Hence, Vayu has been treated as a Element. To identify this Element, its primary
attributes is Touch and primary function is Drying are very important from treatment point
of view.

3) Fire Element (Agni) :

(Shlok Pg.-470 (H))

The elements which have predominance of the properties like 1.hot, 2.sharp, 3.subtle,

4 light 5.dry, 6.transparent and 7. Roop/radiance are known as aagney/fire elements. Their
intake provides heat, digestion, radiance/glow, brightness and good complexion.

31
