Change is the law of nature. This visual world is continuously changing. If carefully
observed, it would be seen that in this change, a substance changes its form into another
form and this change ensures a newness and vitality in the world. The great poet Kalidas
considered only “that” form as pleasant which constantly changes to new. The question
then is - What is the main factor for this transformation? Scholars have accepted the fire
element present in nature as main factor of it. Due to the effect of fire, the substances or
things do get transformed but also get purified which causes continuous perfection in them.
It is for this reason that only after passing through fire (Fire-Pariksha), a thing or thought
achieves a standard of purity.

According to Ayurveda Fire is an element whose energy is form(roop). As per
Ayurveda, to identify an energy or element, its specific and general attributes must be
known. The specific attributes of Fire have been enunciated by the above shloka.

According to Ayurveda, Fire is an element which Chinese scholars have also
accepted. As per Ayurveda, energy of fire is Roop whereas according to Chinese, fire
element's energy is Heat. According to Ayurveda, to identify an element and its energy, it
is essential to identify its specific and common attributes.

It is obvious from the above shloka that the Specific Attributes of fire are Ushna (Hot),
Teekshan (Sharp), Sukshma (Subtle), Laghu (Light), Ruksha (dry), Vishad (clear, bright,
pure) and Roop (Texture). Main functions of fire element are Daah (detoxification), Paak
(digestion), Prabha (glaze) and Prakash (radiance).

i) Ushna (Hot): At physical level, controlling body temperature is the specific attribute
of fire element. At the metaphysical level, warmth of relationship is specific
attribute of fire element.

ii) Teekshan (Sharp): At physical level the enzymes and hormones that activate
different parts of the body have sharp attribute. At metaphysical level, Brilliance of
the Intellect is an indication of intensity of the sharpness of Fire.

iii) Sukshma (Subtle): At physical level, fire has subtle attribute. Secretion from the
Endocrine- glands are very subtle in form and quantity whereas their contribution
in tissue creation and development is very vast even though the quantity of
secretion is very small. At metaphysical level, the shine of intellect is very subtle
and its effect is reflected in the form of knowledge and is non-manifested.
Laghu (Light): As mentioned above, at physical level enzymes and hormones
are of fire element and the form is subtle and light. Fire is Light, in both physical
and metaphysical level. Intelligent analysis of any facts being precise and
reasonable is an indication of fire. At physical level, the effect of hot,sharp foods
(like fire) are light in nature. They reduce adipose (fat) and make the body light.
Salty and sour foods melt the adipose. Hot, acidic and salty foods are light.

iv)
