v) Ruksha (Dry): At physical level, food items, which have nature of fire, produce
dryness to the body and at metaphysical level, due to fire straight talking is indicative
of dryness of thoughts.

vi) Vishad (clear): At metaphysical level, people of fire constitution are straight and
true talkers and this indicates the clear attribute. At physical level, fire burns toxic
elements and makes the elements clear and pure.

Interpretation of Fire based on common attributes:

1) Par - Apar(distant - near): Fire's attribute is visible in the form of fondness based
on which a person becomes close to somebody but far from someone else. In
physical treatment, the digestive system produces plasma and blood close to the
body but tries to keep the excretion far from the body.

2) Sanyog - Vibhag & Prathkatva (Combination - Division, Separation): The

process of metabolism (metabolism = catabolism + anabolism) in the body is a
marvelous example of Sanyog - Vibhag & Prathkatvaa. It is only fire which breaks
and separates each protein part of food into its smallest component - Amino acid
and combining them in two different issues, enables repair and production of various
tissues in the body. At another level, the Fire element is the basis of love in male-
female. In the absence of Fire element, it causes separation of male and femaie.
In presence of Fire, relationships deepens (Sanyog) otherwise sometimes it
becomes a cause of separation (Prathakatva). Similarly, carbohydrates, fats and
minerals have an important role in the metabolic activities in physical treatments.
Based on common attributes it can be developed to great limits.
Sanyog (combination): As we know each element combines with other element
and this combination principle, results in infinite element being far - near with one
another. Similarly, Fire can combine with infinite elements but in between 10
elements, the nearest energy to it, is the basis of treatment. And among these 10
elements, fire has the nearest combination with water element. Ayurvedic
Concepts are most scientific and based on rational knowledge of elements. If
there is excess of fire, it destroys its own residence. So in combination with
water, fire and heat not only control but also promote the sequence of creation.
These two elements (fire & water) when they combine, then in the body, among
Three-forces (Vaata, Pitta, Kapha), they create the most important Pitta and this
bio-force, named as Dosha, creates tissues which are the supporting force
(strength).
