3)

4)

Fundamentally, fire manifests due to Vaayu and so it has close relationship with
Vaayu; so, among the five elements relationship of fire is also with Vaayu - Akash,
Water - earth. Fire also remains under the control of Time, Direction, Mind and
Soul. For example, combination of time with the Fire enables childhood to progress
to adolescence. Stomach’s Fire in combination with time, generates hunger and
thirst. In the brain, combination with time and fire controls sleep.

Combination of fire and direction properly control the heating and digestive
processes. A harmonious and proper combination of Fire and Direction enable
stool and urine to move to their directions otherwise after being non-directional
they give rise to ailments.

When Mind combines with fire, productivity and creativity are produced. Mind in
the form of brain, when combines with the fire is able to develop Intellect, increase
in knowledge and destruction of attachment and doubts. Each element's sense-
organs, Mind, time, Direction etc. all are the functionaries of Soul. Fire also takes
partin all activities of the body. Soul through Mind provides energy to each element.
Fire also receives energy from Soul and supports in body activities to function.
Abhyaas, Sanskaar (Practice,Habit) : Every day, every moment, the daily body
activities, food, daily routine and sleep, the specific body tissues and blood cell
production and destruction are examples of constant practice. Thirst, hunger,
sleep are due to continuous practice. This practice produces and develops physical
and mental habits. In normal conditions, in the absence of proper practice, diseases
take place due to our activity known as Karmaja Roga . Hence every day, the
practice of digestive system creates habits in each tissue. Therefore, if practice
is affected then absence of habit occurs and this creates serious diseases affecting
tissues / body. At the intellectual level, acquiring the knowledge by hearing, writing
and speaking - practice of these three generates habit of thinking. When practice
is self-activated then it automatically becomes habit.

Yukti (medicine): In Ayurveda, several types of herbs, which are hot in character,
used as remedy are called medicine. But in Ayurvedic Acupressure, several fire
points present on meridians, function as medicine at the physical and metaphysical
