In the above shlok, function of every element and their attributes are
incorporated in the element itself. In this shlok, the function of each element is based
on the combination of elements, functions, attributes, residence and time. Energy is
work done. Power is described as Guna (attribute) assigned to each and every
element or matter (dravya). It is clearly defined and parallel to the concept of energy
as defined by scientists. Here in Ayurveda two steps are ahead. This power assigned
to each element is general and specific which determines the nature of element.
The nature (function), form of element is defaced, affected output of work or work
done starts varying which is sole basis of determination of health and disease. The
power bestowed to human bodies by almighty, if it is not used in doing work — again
it is cause of illness and if not used in time, is the cause of illness, if not used for the
specific or general purpose — it is the cause of illness. If proper result is not obtained,
it is cause of illness. Therefore so many things are summarised at one place in the
above shlok and has parallels to energy (fiparefterm), power (771), force (saa), time
(aq), distance (q) etc.

In Ayurveda, energy has been named as soul. Therefore, in Ayurvedic Acupuncture,
the medium of treatment is soul itself. This in itself is a divine and astonishing reality
as has been mentioned earlier. The integration of body and soul makes one live.
The entire consciousness is in soul; each organ and sub-organ of the body etc.
receive energy from the soul and only then become active. So, each organ of the
body is working due to the soul. Among them, mind is the closest organ to the soul.
Through mind, energy is transmitted to the other organs. So, the importance of mind
is not only in literature and scriptures but is equally important in reality too. From
treatment point of view, nucleus of brain is the residence of soul and limbic system,
and mid brain is the residence of the mind. Energy appears in two ways according
to scriptures - God and soul. God is the macro form of energy. It is one and
omnipresent. But soul is the micro form of energy. It is a non-manifested form of
God and a fragment of God, which is present in every living being, body, organ,
tissue, cell, etc. So, due to this, soul is infinite and as is clear from the following
shloka.
arate sre & fefaet stare aeaeT Ul
weet: ade: GATE ves ca) shoe wftrete Fret faspficerec |

(Pg.-27 (H))
The residence of knowledge is known as atma. It is classified into two as
Jeevatma(human soul) and Paramatma (divine soul). Here the Paramatma is
omnipresent and is only one. Jeevatma(living soul) is in different forms in different
bodies.
