level. For example, whereas by giving treatment of any point in the liver meridian
the function of metabolism improves, but by giving treatment at the Fire point on
the mind meridian, the state of unstable mind can be controlled. Similarly, treatment
at the Fire point of lung meridian controls the normal body temperature. Again,
treatment on the Fire point of the blood meridian can naturally control acidity or
burning sensation in blood and creates scabies or itching in skin due to blood.

5) Sankhya, Parimaap(Number, Measurement): In body’s growth sequence, in

adolescence, appearance of beard and moustache in boys and starting of
menstruation in girls is a measurement of youth. The beginning of reproductive
power is also a manifestation of the Fire element. In old age, end of reproductive
capacity is also a measurement of fire element. The process of hunger and thirst
is also an indication of the digestive system's Fire element. How many times we
eat, and how many times we feel thirst, how much to eat and how much to drink -
are alla measurement of Fire element.

Main tastes of fire element are sour, salty and bitter. Some important typical disease
case histories related to the Fire element on the basis of common and specific attributes
and its combination with other elements, are given below: -

Case - 1 Paralysis due to brain Heamatoma: A person at Kota (Rajasthan) had an
attack of paralysis on 6/1/04 and the cause as said to be was High blood pressure. For his
treatment, the therapist at Kota Chandradev was contacted. He started treatment as given
in various treatment processes in the Sansthan’s trimonthly magazine “Acupressure
Acupuncture Saraswati”. In the CT Scan, the haematoma was shown in brain’; ;

lobe. First treatment given as indicated in the “Saraswati” magazine, for three vee gave
75 % relief, this greatly surprised the doctors of other therapies. After this, CT Scan showed
10 - 15 % reduction in the size of the node (haematoma). On 9/1/04, the patient was given
Ayurvedic Acupressure treatment related to Brain Cortex meridian, F-9-V jt— 5 sedate, 3,
7 tone. On 11/1/04, it was informed on telephone that due to these three acu-points, there
has been extremely good relief in restlessness, insomnia and headache.

Case-2 Gas, Burning and Constipation : An Allahabad’s Brahmin’s family three
members - son, his wife and his father were chronic patients of indigestion. The father was
suffering from symptoms of constipation, ring worms, burning and gas (apart from other
symptoms) for 20 — 25 years; the son for 10 - 15 years and his wife for 5 - 6 years. All the

oh

