three patients were treated by sedating Fire and toning Water on the plasma and blood
related meridians; on the acupoint of Tam WBM and on the acupoint of Soul YBM were
applied. Within a week, the three patients reported 20 %, 50 % and 40 % relief respectively.

Case -3 Psoriasis with itching and burning : From Sultanpur, the son-in-law of
Sansthan's senior therapist suffered from chronic itching with burning and black spots on
the whole body and allopathic doctors diagnosed these ailments - psoriasis simultaneously
with heart ailments. Based on the patient's test, he was treated for blood disorder sedating
Fire and toning Water and Akash on the tissue meridians L IF on pitta jointi.e.’ 3 sedate, 1,
4 tone. The patient got tremendous relief in two days and he was overwhelmed and
astonished with the result.

Case - 4 Arterial blockage : An educationist of Dnaar (Madhya Pradesh), connected
with the Sansthan for over five-years was suffering from diabetes and high blood pressure
due to main arterial blockage. Despite trying several types of treatment, the patient
continuously by suffered and no relief was forthcoming. According to Ayurvedic
Acupuncture, treatment was given on the heart meridians - Left SF Kapha joint - toning Fire
and the Water and sedating 5 i.e. earth. The patient experienced relief in just one day,
which he had not got in five years,

Case — 5: Irregular menstruation :Menstruation did not start in a 20 year old girl.
The girl came to the Sansthan with her parents and told that despite taking treatment of
other therapies, menses did not appear. It was obvious that the young lady had physically
entered in her life’s second phase but did not receive the Soul of youth. The feelings are
generated with menstruation and, of reproduction; obviously, the parents were seriously
worried about the future of the girl due to her serious disease. With this background, the girl
took her treatment at the Sansthan. According to Ayurvedic Acupressure, treatment was
given on the Rt thumb Vaat joint's ,creative hole and on the Rt hand’s SF pitta joint, the
gonads by toning Vaayu and Fire’s acu-point and sedating time (Kaal’s) acupoint i.e., 2 3,
tone 6 sedate. She got adequate relief and benefit.

From the above typical examples, it is clear that Fire element is also an important
element. It is recognized by its attribute heat and function to burn.

