4) Water Element (Jal) :

(Shlok Pg.-470 (H))

The elements with the properties like 1. Liquidity/rarefied, 2. smooth, 3.cold, 4.dull,
5.soft, 6.slippery and 7. Taste are called jaleeya/water elements. Their intake provides
wetness, smoothness, bondage, transparency, softness and joy. Taste is its prime property.

‘TAT RID BIE i.e., only that sentence can be turned poetic, in which, there is
Ras (taste). This principle is true and applicable normally for poetry but is realistic for entire
life and taste is extremely necessary in life. Else, tasteless living is neither here nor there
i.e. monotonous. Our speech, our thought’s, our activities, our living in all tastes is necessary
for ensuring zest in life. There is an idiom - “tat awit afew, 44 or sar Gla, sia B sitet
we, 310g eile 2a" speak such words which come from the heart, liked by everyone
which give comfort and cooling effect to others and to one’s own self. The question is that,
which element does this job in different activities of life? Actually, this is Water which in
combination with other elements makes life passionate or tasteful (rasamaya). Perhaps,
that is why it is called that “Water is life.”

According to Ayurveda, after Fire, Water is the fourth Element, whose Energy is Ras
(taste). The previous all three elements and their energies as have been considered included
in the Water element. Specific attributes connected with Water element are clear from the
above shloka. Specific attributes of Water element are Drav (rarified), Snighdh i.e., smooth,
Sheet (cold), Mand (passive), Mridu (soft), Pichchil (sticky) and Ras (passion, juice,
essence, flavor, taste) ; functions of Water are moisten, smoothen, joining(cohesion),
soften, satisfying and serving the sense-organ’s necessities.

In the physical world, there is a specific attribute and function of water i.e. to generate
and pacify by its own cold attribute the heat, burning and inflammation produced due to fire.
Where fire substances speed up and stimulate a reaction, Water with its passive attrioute
slows down the intensity of the reaction and establishes harmony and balance. The natural
attribute of Water being soft, it is acceptable and becomes drinkable. At the metaphysical
level, Water removes feelings of dryness and stiffness and establishes good feeling and
love. Soil is harsh, by nature but when Water is added to it, it becomes flexible and soft for
the potter enabling him to cast beautiful pots by churning it on his potters’ wheel. Due to the
properties of smoothness, greasiness and stickiness, soil develops cohesive property, its
particles stick to each other, in presence of water and due to softness its form becomes
attractive. Water’s function is to moisten. Function of water is cohesion, join, softness
assemble and has the strength even to join the toughest and hardest of particles. For
example, cement is composed of extremely tough particles but in the presence of Water,
becomes capable of joining tough particles like sand and stone ballast.
