In the physical world, function and attributes of water particles are used in the creation
of body's different organs, sub-organs, tissues etc. The use of Water element in the field of
treatment has proved very effective in the, cure of even extremely serious diseases. In the
first part of GIT i.e., on the tongue, any thing even driest possible becomes wet with the
secreted saliva from the oral cavity, and food becomes ready for swallowing. Saliva is
secreted in excessive quantity so that it assists and is used for, swallowing of food and
plasma and blood particles are finally created. Thus Water makes the toughest substances
and particles useful by making them soft, smooth and wet. Water's wonderful quality is
breaking and slaughter. Its attribute is combining and joining. At the metaphysical level, the
Water generates compassion, love, affection, care, friendship etc. In normal practice also
a show of mercy and compassion is quality of water. A mother's love strengthens son/
daughter's relationship with her. It is this love that brings all living beings together and
enables the visualisation of the concept of Vasudhev Kutumbkam meaning whole world is
a family. Hence if cruelty develops in a person and love, affection starts disappearing, then
by toning water element on the mind meridian, cruelty will reduce and feeling of love and
affection will increase. In the rarest of cases, if a mother becomes cruel, although this is
not possible, then on the O, (origin) meridian, toning the Water point is capable to change
her attitude.

Due to previous Vaayu and Fire elements, if internal dispute divides the mind or the
heart of two people breaks relationships to no talking level, then if on the mind finger
(Rt MF) 8 Hzm, mind and Water points will be toned, then arguments, property disputes
etc can be resolved. Rt Th (O)- 0 meridian’s Water point tone, if continued for some time
will give the best relief. The way the body is affected by the five elements, in the same way
the Navgrah (nine-planets) in cosmos also affect, based on the previous birth’s karmas(acts
done before birth). The treatment mentioned above freeze a person from ill effect of planets
also.

Water lubricates the food starting from the tongue level itself, so that it is able to slip
onwards to travel a long distance for a long time. Water element in the GIT (gastro-intestinal
tract), combine with the food and assist it in whatever form it takes. Liquids which are
Water element, are secreted from Stomach, Duodenum, Gall bladder, Pancreas etc, then
these secretions impact with the Fire elements - enzymes, hormones - and in the process
of creation and rebuilding, provide the strength to and development of body organs and
sub-organs. Thus, the functions of element at both physical and metaphysical levels are
increase of the growth and cohesion,

Water dissolves toxic elements in it and thus helps in removing from the body and
also by combining with Fire elements, separate toxins from the body and provides full
