support to make the body free from diseases. The way the 2/3rd of the cosmos consists of
Water, in the same way 2/3rd of our body has Water element. Hence out of the total intake
of food 3/4th should bé Water element. So every day 3-litres of water should be taken in.

As the Water element functions to combine with the previous elements in sequence
(Akash, Vaayu, Fire), its other function is of cleaning. Andaj (born out of eggs) and sprouted
out or excreted from the six levels of skin through sweat, all tre substances that appear in
the form of rashes, scurry etc. out of the skin pores are excrete out of the body mainly
through the medium of Water element. To excrete out the pus from the complicated structure
on the inside of the ear, tears from the eyes, secretions from the nose, saliva dropping
from the mouth, all indicate of some toxins been removed from inside the brain and help in
the diagnosis of chronic ailments. White secretions or scales or rashes/ scurvy etc. in
axilla, gonads and from head - hair pores etc. like that sticky secretion from naval,
leucorrhoea(white discharge) from vagina are indications of acute and serious ailments.
All these diseases have one common cause viz. their Water element in one or another
form.

Relationship of Water element and habit: How is assembly done? The potter
assembles earth and water. What should ne the ratio between them? This is denoted by
the measurement and number. How many times the soil is mixed with Water to create
softness ? How much to mix - this is decided by measurement and number. Similarly, how
much Water should be added to one fistful of flour so that proper dough is made? This is
dependent on measurement and number. Hence for any assembly, number and
measurement are essential. Due to combination of Water, Kapha is formed and also Pitta.
Thus out of the three forces Vaata, Pitta and Kapha, in the formation of two i.e., Pitta and
Kapha, the Water element is the necessary ingredient. This means that as in cosmos 2/
3rd component is Water, in the same way in the body its creative function is 2/3rd and is an
important constituent.

In human life, Water is a symbol of love. Fire destroys the organ where it resides,
whereas Water is another form of love, therefore, Water saves their residence from
destruction by controlling the Fire / heat. Water also creates a base for use by combining
in a proper quantity. If the quantity of Water is more than required, dough will not be formed.
Only when dry flour and Water are mixed in proper quantity, only then it can be useful.
Flour is like earth element (soil) but when it combines with Water, it is easy to make bread
and when it combines with Fire it becomes a Panjiri (roasted flour).Earth element itself is
not creative. In Yajurveda, in the form of Life, Light and Love (L, L, L-life ,light, love), the
Water has been e-zepted as a replica of Love, Affection, cohesion, and Attachment. L. L.
L. is the canvas :reation; either it is human body or cosmos.

Relationsh between Water and Time: At both physical and metaphysical levels,
both are importe At the gross level, the relation of time with Water is apparent in the
weather andthe _asons. According to Yajurveda, the creative elements are Air, Fire and
