Chapter - 2

Salient Features Of Ayurvedic Acupressure

1)

2)

3)

Definition of Ayurveda : Scriptures which speak and analyse benevolent/
detrimental, tranquil/suffering, wholesome/unhealthy measures of life, attributes/
functions etc. with proof & symptoms is defined as Ayurveda. It has been elaborated
as follows:
“Rata ye qaarpeRa Reread! AK a ger caleTgdas Sema |”

(Shlok-41 Pg.-13 (H))
The symptoms described in the form of hitt ayu(beneficial life), ahitt ayu(non —
beneficial life), sukh ayu(happy life), dukh ayu(unhappy life) and that which is suitable
(dravya, gunn, karma- elements, attributes, functions) and not-suitable, longevity
and its proof, duration etc is described under ayurveda.
Cosmos & Human Body : The human being (pind) is a fragment (part) of the
universe (bramahand) and so it is natural that there is similarity in the two.Whatever
is in universe is also in the human body; the only difference is in macro and micro.
Whatever conscious emotions existing in this earth are all present in the human
being and whatever are present in the human being are all present in the universe.
So there is similarity in Prakriti (nature) and Purush (human body).

“oredt f& cies affard ona fieterecea: Gee, orara: Gos areal ats

(Shlok-3 Pg.-897 (H))
As many , physical/metaphysical components are seen in the cosmos, so also are
in the human being and as many components are there in the purush(human) so
also are in the cosmos.
Yin-Yang and Prakriti-Purush(Cosmos-Human):Chinese Acupuncture's yin-yang
and Ayurveda'‘s Prakriti-Purush, both represent the cuality principle. The yin-yang's
principle is based on the solar system. The entire earth receives energy from the
Sun and all the Planets revolve around the Sun. The part of the earth which faces
the Sun is illuminated, it has the day, it has activity there. As opposite to this, earth's
part that does not receive Sun's light is dark, is virtually lifeless, inactive—this is
Chinese yin and illuminated part is called yang. This same principle applies both to
the Universe and the Human Body. On this basis, both living and lifeless particles
can be classified into yin -yang.Actually yin-yang, despite being opposing forces—
are actually complimentary to each other.
Every day in the cycle of Time, the revolution of the planets around the sun converts
day into night and the night into day. What it means is that the change from yin to
yang and from yang to yin is time cyclic and this is not under the control of our body.
If childhood and youth are yang, then senior citizenship and old age are yin.
Differentiating between childhood and youth, if childhood is yang then youth is yin.
lf summer and spring are yang, then monsoon and cold season are yin. Happiness
