Water. The year is a gross representative of time; its division in the sequence of weather
Spring (form of air) is the first, the next is Summer (form of Fire) and the third is the Rainy
season (form of Water). On the time sequence, starting of the Rainy season represents
creativity and support in nutrition. For example, timely rains and its adequate quantity helps
proper irrigation of soil which assists in cultivation of adequate crops. Production of food
grains as the basis for proper physical development of body is indicative of a relationship
between Water and time. In the body also, timely intake of Water and its excretion is
controlled by Time. Similarly, a person is not able to sleep during the night due to night
urination (contrary to the time). When time attacks, the children in sleep do bed wetting and
elders sleep is disturbed due to night urination. Bed wetting is an ailment and its successful
treatment is simply4, sedate 6, tone. This is a wonderful treatment.

Similarly, all activities (eating, living, sleep) are based on time and controlled by it.
Metaphysical form of water appears in many ways such as cohesion, joining, bonding,
meeting, mercy, love etc. Among human beings, it is Time which when combines with
Water ensures development of wonderful symptoms of friendship, love, romance, kindness
etc. During youth, Water combines with Fire, creates Romance. During motherhood, secrets
breast milk and generate love for the new born. The situation represents a wonderful
combination of Water and time. From time to time, due to the Water, friendship among
friends and due to deficiency, animosity among enemies develops. In human beings,
goodness towards society, becomes prevalent due to combination of Water with time.

Relation of Water and Direction: To understand the direction of Water, two of its
important attributes - passive and rarified - need to be appreciated. Flow of river water is
mainly due to these two properties and due to these only; the Water decides its direction.
The quality of fluid (rarified) is flow which is based on space. Normally, Water flows down-
wards fron; height; but it starts flowing wherever it gets space, so much so that even in the
smallest of hole in can enter from several directions; whatever form it adopts, it starts
flowing in that direction. For example even in a well designed and constructed building by

xnert engineering, dampness can be seen in walls as water enters in the pores after rains
and makes the walls moist. If one studies the body’s circulatory and the lymphatic system,
it is seen that plasma end blood flowing in the small and big, blood / lymph vessels, in
specific direction, they break the weak vessels, and cause serious diseases to the person.
This reflects combination of Water with Direction and space(Akash).

Based on Water's companionship and attachment relationships, a mother’s relationship
with her ch 'c :s (Apr) * Near’ i. e. close and all her other relationships are (Par) - distant.
Similarly, hus .2nd- vife reiationship is close (Apar) rest is distant. Hence, the Water element
is also an eleme::', which can be identified by its cold-attribute and cohesion-function and
these are very im,portant in diagnosis and treatment.

