5) Prithvi Element (Earth) :
wa cent qwenaorraertecameprrenpragen ofa,
arquacrasarcniaeteiarnit; (Shlok, Pg.-470 (H))

The elements with the properties like 1. Heavy, 2. Rough, 3. Hard, 4.Dull, 5. Stable, 6.
Transparent 7. Concentrated, 8. Gross and 9. Smell are known as paarthiv/earthly elements.
They provide metabolism, growth, cohesion, heaviness and stability. Its predominant
property is smell.

“are yea, gatse yferem:” makes it clear that the way a child receives dependence
and nourishment in a mother's lap, in the same way not only all the living beings but all
visible substances are dependent on Earth. Earth is the residence of the entire world
where everyone (living or non-living) resides. The way sky (Akash) provides the covering
from upper side, in the same way, earth provides the base below. For humanity, earth is
like the mother who takes care of everyone in her lap and becomes capable to achieve
lives determination and ambition.

As an Element, earth is the last of the five Elements and it incorporates the attributes
of all the other four elements. Earth element's main attributes are heaviness, roughness,
hardness, stability, solidity and gross form and earth element's energy is (Gandh) smell.
The above shloka casts a light on attributes and functions of earth element.

Earth Element : Earth element provides enlargement. cohesion, heaviness, stability
and rigidity. In Chinese Acupuncture, earth element is considered in the third position after
wind and fire and the related Energy as humidity. According to Vedas, the three Creative
elements are Air (Vaayu), Fire and Water and earth and sky provide protection to the three
elements. Earth element becomes active after combining with the three elements and then
gets the physical form. According to Ayurveda each element incorporates the attributes
and functions of the previous Element. On this basis, in earth element, the attributes and
functions of Akash, Vaayu, Fire and Water are incorporated and like that in its energy
“Smell” other four energies of previous elements are also included. At a macro level, the
body itself is Earth element, but is created due to togetherness (samvaya) of the five
elements. At a micro level, all the big and small bones in the body, numbering about 300,
are also called earth. Sweat in the form of waste and urine are water and stool is called
earth. The sub- tissues of bones viz. hairs on head and body, nails also components of
bones are called earth. For their treatment, it is expected that the earth point is selected on
the respective meridians. As Earth called earthly (solid) in cosmos, in the same way, in the
body there is a shape (structure) as physical body. Form and shape of any structure is
stable. Anything which has rigidity is solid, heavy and hard is also called earthly element.

In the body, specific attribute of earth is seen in the form of earthly element in the
bones of body; compared to the other tissues like blood, plasma, skin, adipose, semen- all
the specific attributes of earth element like heaviness, roughness, stability, rigidity,
denseness and grossness are all together manifested in the bones. In the bones there is
excess of Calcium. (Calcium 70 % and Water component 30%). In the Bone cavities, the
