bone marrow produces blood and its flow; thus bones are clear examples of the presence
of all the Five- Elements in them.

This example of bones completely proves that they are mainly earthy and all the
(four) elements present in them. In the cavities is Akash element, in the blood flowing in
them forming of bone marrow Vaayu and Fire and the 30 % Water are in itself a proof of
Water. This is not approved in any other prevalent stream of Acupuncture. So apart from
bones, due to excess of oesteophytes, serious symptoms of ankolysing spondylitis appear
and make a patient disabled. It becomes hard for such a patient to live due to continuous
pain; in such a case treatment of the deficiency of Water and earth is the most appropriate
treatment. Excess of Water in bones gives rise to osteoporosis which causes crack, so
sedate Water(4), tone earth(5) on the Bone Joint is most appropriate. All substances related
with Akash and earth element develop the creative power only by the combination of Air,
Fire and Water. In Chinese Acupuncture, such type of concept did not exist.

In Earth and Akash elements , creativity is minimal. Vaayu provided the base for
Sound-waves, otherwise they will remain unclear and non-manifested. Water Element
provides strength after combining with Fire / earth. It is this Water element that creates
harmony between the organ and its sub-organs. Blood whose nature is Water (45 % cells,
55 % plasma cells) has less of earth (solid) but more of Water component. This blood
starting from the middle (heart) of the body, flows up and down throughout the body. Earth
itself is inactive but it is the power of Water that can provide flexibility in it. If flour is kept as
it is, Vaayu will blow it away. When Fire comes, flour is burnt, turns into ashes and was of
no utility. Water will change the form of earth element, whether it is organic or inorganic,
that power and strength is in Water and Water only. Water helps in action and reaction of
the earthly substances inside the human body; it is capable of transforming its stiffness
and hardness. The heart distributes Water in the form of blood all around.

Normally if one observes, it may be seen that inside Earth all elements - with Akash,
Vaayu, Fire, Water, and Earth attributes are present in huge quantities. Every type of metal
and mineral are extracted from inside the earth. From scientific point of view, classification
of earthly substances has been done on organic and inorganic basis. The formation of
both types of earthly substances inside the earth is due to constant chemical action and
reaction between the various earthly substances and this continues for centuries. Some
substances become active fast and some become active slowly; combining with other
elements, metamorphosis takes place. And the creation of each element is decided by
Time. All activities are based on the sequence of time. Like the earth, the body also has
several types of substances and they constantly pass through the sequence of creation
and destruction. The body also like Earth has several types of salts and minerals; among
these are Calcium, Phosphorus, Potassium, Chloride, Sodium, Iron, Copper, Sulphur,
Chloride, lodine. All these are also present in balanced form in proper quantity in our daily
food. Any imbalance in their quantity gives rise to disease. The deficiency of Iron results in
Anaemia, Hookworm; the deficiency of lodine results in Goitre; the deficiency of Calcium
gives rise to several diseases of bones.

