Cells of brain infarct. Level of brain is higher than the level of heart. Heart does effort, to
provide blood to the brain. In hypotension brain does not get blood in proper quantity, but in
hypertension there is a fear of rupturing of blood vessels of brain.Oxygen present in
haemoglobin, provides the essential energy to the brain cells for their work.

Functional area of saadhak pitta is brain but heart also takes part in it. Brain and
heart are dependent on each other for their work. “aetearraf gaa u yea” God has
irrigated the heart and brain of a person.

Imbalance of saadhak pitta:
1) Heart attack

2) Indecision

3) Emotional disturbance
(3) Aalochaka pitta :

‘sieirerafe aefafe way sft, ancien’ | (Pg.-379 (H))

The one which resides in the eyes and helps in seeing is known as Alockak pitta. The

function of balanced pitta is “to see”means sight disorders are due to imbalanced Aalochak
pitta.

“SUSE ya | THRASH |

Pitta which resides in eyes, helpful in visualising scenes is known as Aalochak pitta.
Aalochak pitta is of two types-

(1) Chakshu vaisheshik (specific to eyes)

(2) Buddhi vaisheshik (specific to intellect)

Seeing things by eyes and obtaining knowledge from that about the difference among
objects is specific to eyes and is Aalochak pitta. Difference in between two persons, in dog
and ass, in between two fruits, seeing many things at a time or one thing at a time, difference
in them of colour, shape or position etc. is by chakshu vaisheshik pitta.

End points of optic nerve spread on the inner wall of eye orbit. These end points are
called as cones and rods by the view of their shape. When sunrays fall on it then
photochemical changes takes place in it. This change stimulates the optic nerve and
impulses created by this stimulation transfers to the vision centre of brain. Vision centre
from its past experiences informs about the differences between two things. For the
knowledge of vision by chakshu vaisheshik aalochak pitta, it is necessary that optic nerve

C21)
