As all the elements are considered as panch bhautik, none are considered as not
made by a specific method and for a specific purpose/utility. Thus all elements are useful
in the form of medicine, in one way or the other.

6) Kaal Element (Time) :

ag acd yomadea cont enfant wafta; xenfh fe xeomTareqomarae

TeRpaa ca are ceeexormrena ai at a afteael a ai anf aq

pha aq ad, a4 oda add, on pda aaftrexi, aa pda a oe:, an GPa a

So:, AT ererafea Aq eA 1311 (Shlok-13, Pg.-472 (H))

The elements are not only active due to their properties(gunn), but also due to the
effects of elements, effects of properties and the effects of both element and property; and
also on the time/moment at which they come into action; the place/ residence where the
activity takes place; the techniques/ methods used and the purpose of the activity- all this
is called ‘karma’ (function). The component involved is calleu ‘Virya’(hormones etc); the
place affected due to it is called adhikaran (residence); the moment when worked upon is
called Kaal(time); the way/ methods used is called Upaay(technique) and the purpose
fulfilled is Phall(result).

For the existence of any form of the world, the concept of Time is essential. Not only
for physical existence but for any imaginary existence also, the presence and concept of
Time is essential. What it means is this - no power or thought is possible until it takes the
shelter of time. Time is the postulate for the entire dead and living existence. The entire
existence is born out of Time and in course of time is drowned in Time itself. Time is the
deciding and important element of creation and universal destruction.

Human life as a wonderful union of animate and inanimate in the form of the body,
functions under the direction of the internally present Soul and performs its predestined
activities, generation after generation.’eRRraaacaret wae sifaaq Peerrearqdera
pepe Ty AH |”

It too becomes the successful divinity of the life, under the cycle of Time. In our daily
life, we normally hear, “it is time”, “it is time to get up”, “this is the time for lunch / dinner’,
“it is time to play and to enjoy” etc. These statements in our daily routine of life indicate to
us in a significant manner the presence of Time. Whether it is the whole body or its phases
like childhood, adolescence, youth, adulthood, old age and even the ultimate face of life
viz., death are all predetermined and controlled by Time. The entire day can be considered
as a unit of Time. This has also been recognised again as morning, noon, evening, night
and midnight as different phases / periods of the day as subparts of Time. Cycle of Time -
controls every moment of life whose phases and sub-phases viz., second, minute, hour,
day, week, month, year, century, millennium etc have been divided from the smallest to the
biggest level. In a human body and in cosmos, all different incidents happening continuously

