daily, in sequence, the change of season etc. are a factor of different changes is Time
only. Variation in daily temperature appears as different climate changes and its continuance
for a few months can be recognized as seasons; the seasons are also controlled by Time
only.

In life, the proof of success can also be considered as Time. This can actually be
experienced as ‘ discipline’ or as ‘Always on time’. People neglecting time or following
irregular daily routine generally suffer from serious diseases. From Ayurveda’s point of
view, Hit Ayu / Ahit Ayu (useful life / useless life), Sukh Ayu / Dukh Ayu (happy life / sad
life), also reflects a whole life time in which if the life is full of sadness then it only means
that the life has been devoid of happiness and joy. So Ayurveda’s message is that, a
person should not neglect / insult Time. ‘ Time’ waits for none; it is just another name for
constant motion. If time passes away, then any amount of effort a person makes, the work
will never get properly completed. On the other hand, if the work is done on time, then even
with comparatively less effort, success is achieved and such work enables a person to
achieve new heights in life. All eminent statesmen in the world have always given great
respect to Time and they in turn received ample respect and glory. In fact ‘ Time’ is that
metaphysical force, all that micro dynamism that provides for shape to a person's ability.

Any disturbance of Time in daily life can result in several diseases. Disease is due to
eating, sleeping or working not according to time, come under this category. If food is not
taken on time, then digestion will not be proper and will result in faulty tissue growth and
several ailments will subsequently develop. Similarly, Time affects the sleep also; if we
don't sleep on time or if we do not sleep adequately, then in time we will suffer from insomnia.
Adequate sleep is related to a person's age as is fixed accordingly; for a child it is 10 - 12
hours, for youth 8 hours and in old age 6 - 7 hours and all persons should affirm to this
sleep schedule otherwise due to insomnia, advent of several ailments are bound to come.
It is therefore clear that all Karmaj (work related) ailments are directly or indirectly controlled
by Time.

Par (distant) and Apar (near) are determined only by Time. Those which are very far
are brought nearer only by Time. Time only increases friendship; problems and
misunderstandings are removed by Time; Time only heals wounds too. Time only makes
the nearer and the nearest to the most distant. It is clear that both distant and near are
normally based on Time's Energy. Meeting and Separation are two activities. Meeting can
be happy and separation can be a cause for unhappiness. To come and meet irrespective
of it being between father - son, brother - friend and finally separation in the last journey, all
these are a part in this life as constant dynamism. In this process, the body remains back
here; separation is only of ‘ Soul’. The question is - Who separates Soul from the body?
Generally people say that - ‘that person’s time has come and he has gone’ i.e., when time
