came, from the body made of five elements, Soul seperates and based on their creativity
the five elements of body were transformed and merged into the five elements of cosmos.

Soul as a symbol of body remains live in the form of Time. Soul never expires. Hence,
sense of timing is the sense of life. When there is no sense of time, energy of time is
absent, the person is living like a dead-body. Such a person, due to lack of understanding
of the importance of every moment wastes time, and in course ruins his zest for life.

Due to the Energy of Time, one gets understanding of Sanskar (Habit) and Abhyas
(Practice). If a person repeatedly obeys time and practice, then this practice will take him
towards progress and fulfillment. This knowledge enables a person to become incapable
or incompetent. A person’s capability or weakness both come to light only by Time. To go
to school daily on time or to reach office on time - and practicing it, a person becomes
habituated to time, which in time becomes the person's habit. And habits always open a
way to progress and prosperity for a person. Keep them away from mistakes and bad
deeds and never droop to ill habits. Time only decides a person's likes-dislikes. For example,
if a child does not like to go to school, he is not removed from the school; further even if he
fails repeatedly in his class, only time will decide when he has to leave the school. It is not
possible for five-element to have control over Time but only time is the controller of everything.
The perception of Time is constantly present in this body.

\f after taking food ,the Gall Bladder does not accept it, then symptoms of vomiting &
burning will appear; if Duodenum and small Intestine do not acceptit, then thinking will be
clouded; the more it reaches micro level uneasiness will increase. On the other hand if its
acceptance & digestion and waste excretion happens timely, the person will feel sense of
relief. Balance and imbalance status of G.I.T. is arrested here itself and several elements
combine in the G.I.T.Any obstruction anywhere in the G.I.T, starts producing allergic
reactions.

In every phase of human life, the knowledge of Time is in the form of bearing force.
The body and its organs, according to sequence of Time, what & how much rest, it depends
on time. Hence, according to Ayurveda Time is an element. “aerafe arerafe ar aria:
@rd:" i.e. to end living beings is the function of Time. Winters, summers, monsoon
anda constant all pervasiveness is the attribute of Time. Mainly time is metaphysical,
its physical form is visible in the form of attributes and functions.

{In the body the physical form of Time is the spinal cord and Brain stem. Body's sixth
finger/toe in hand/foot represents Time’s meridian for treatment. Spinal cord is an important
part of the nervous system; the external environment through the spinal cord effects the
body .Hence, all types of ailments arising out of the effects of winter,summer & monsoons
can be successfully treated through this important part of the nervous system, i.e., Time.

