Most of the source points of sense-organs, the cranial nerves starting from the brain stem
and several reflexes like respiratory, cardiac centre, barometer centre, vomiting, coughing,
sneezing and swallowing being present in the medulla, treatment of all related ailments can
be done by the Time Energy.

All types of cycles are based on Time. Hence, menstruation cycle or weather cycle
related all ailments are treated by Time Energy and is a specialty of Ayurvedic Acupuncture.
Different diagnostic tables have been shown, in which diagnosis and symptoms of diseased
organs related to Time energy are there. On every meridian, acu-points of time are available
and they can be used based on 10 origin principle and _ infinite type of ailments can be
treated by time (kalaj rog).

Among months of 12-15 years, non-appearance of beard/ moustache, no formation of
semen on time, in female no -appearance of menses in 12-15 years of age, in children, no
mental & physical development; in all these states treatment on related meridians of Time
energy on specific acu point, it is possible to control and treat effectively. But sometimes in

thece ailmants.'

_ 2M, 21m treatment may be necessary. Lack of thirst or appetite or lack of
sleep on time are some of the situations where treatment by Time energy can be effective.
Bed wetting by children and taking many hours in passing stool have successfully been
treated by Time energy. On several situations, a person becomes nervous & fear full and
sometimes in specific cases gets emotions of undue worry, fear and depression; in all
such cases, treatment by Time acupoints is desirable.

Treatment of High Blood pressure & Arthritis by Time:During winter season due
to cold wave when the entire body shrinks, then the blood vessels can't escape the attack
of cold, they also shrink so that for blood flow, extra force is required and the body suffers
high blood pressure. During summers, due to expansion in blood vessels, its flow or speed
increases and within normal situation also blood pressure increases. Thirdly, due to
increased pollution in environment, oxygen is not saturated in blood, & blood pressure
increases. Thus, in all the above three situations, increase of blood pressure is due to
Time and so the treatment is also expected to be done by Time energy.

tt has already been asked above that based on similarity principle, the organ in the
body, related to Time energy are spinal cord and brain stem, a part of brain. So it is an
important component of the nervous system. Therefore, aliments of imbalance in Time
diseases like backache, sciatica, leg pains, cervical, arms ailments, eye/nose/ear/mouth
etc. ailments, Time dependant emotional aliments like fear, joy, excitement, anger, self
confidence, depression, menstrual- cycle diseases, nervous system problems and for
any disease & for the control of each organ, sub- organ, Time energy can be used.
