Hence, normally, left hand's ring finger and corresponding toe, i.e., finger/toe no. 6 are
available for Time energy treatment. For specific treatment, on each finger & toe, the sixth
vertical, horizontal & spiral meridian and further, on all meridians, the sixth acupoints is
available in the form of Time for treatment.

As we know, the nervous system functions in the body as the controller of all other
body systems, and without it, functioning of an organ can't be proper. In the whole body,
the network of nervous system is a vast network so that every part of the body coordinates
(sanyog) with the brain and works under its control; so much so that all the secretions
related to organs are operated by the nerves. It can be said that the nervous system
provides power of functioning by all yin-yang organs. For example, heart’s functioning is
based on SA/AV node so provides bio electricity to the heart that enables the entire blood
circulation in the entire cosmos like body in just 8 seconds; similarly, on a finger related to
each organ like liver, lungs, kidneys, spleen, gall bladder, large intestine, small intestine,
urinary bladder, stomach etc., there is a meridian and on each meridian the nervous
system's point is easily available for treatment which is related to the Time energy.

7) Disha Element (Direction) :

According to Ayurveda, the body has infinite organs, infinite elements, and infinite
diseases, infinite causes for such diseases, so methods, treatment and causes are also
infinite. Diagnosis of treatment are also infinite, in fact everything is infinite but in that infinite

1. Zero (0) isInfinite
One (1) Parmatma
Two (2) Parmatma and Atma
Three (3) Parmatma, Atma And Body
Four (4) Parmatma, Atma, Body &Mind
Five (5) Parmatma, Atma, Body, Mind & Sense-Organs
Six (6) Parmatma, Atma, Body, Mind, Sense-Organs &Time
Seven (7) Parmatma, Atma, Body, Mind, Sense-Organs, Time & Direction
. Eight (8) Atma, Mind, Sense-Organs, Body (Five-elements)

10. Nine (9) Atma, Mind, Sense-Organs, Body (Five-elements), Tam(infinity)

Direction is also an Element; therefore, visible/non-visible and p.ysical/ metaphysical
is in togetherness (inseperable). How this Direction is physical/metaphysical or invisible &
how it is present in the body & through it, how can treatment be done, can be explained by
a few broad examples given here under.

Direction as an element: In Acupuncture treatment, meridian, chakra treatment &
their importance is well known. In both these, the importance of Direction is involved. In
meridian, the flow- in normal/ opposite direction i.e. tonification /sedation process is there
which is the main basis of acupuncture is treatment. Similarly, in chakra treatment, the flow
of energy from centre to periphery and to centre is indicative of energy's transfer,
decentralization or centralization.

G@

CONOARWND

