Scientists even today do not accept the presence of meridians and chakras in the
body yet they accept the direction of the entire body by the nervous system which is as
two components the brain & the spinal cord. Who controls the nervous system and the
endocrine system? Scientists are silent about it! Philosophers call it “Life Force”. In all
parts of the world, there have been even some names of it, which scientists see it as
question mark. According to philosophers, meridians and chakras are powertul sources of
energy, which Chinese scientists and philosophers have proved to be the means of
treatment and our scriptures also confirm it. All these facts indicate that energy that flows
in meridians and chakra may be non-manifested but the philosophers had knowledge of its
direction of flow. The sense of direction is the metaphysical form of Direction and Direction
is its physical form.

So far we saw the metaphysical form of Direction in meridian & chakras. Physical
form of direction can be visualized in body’s digestive system, blood circulatory system &
nervous system. All these function under Direction! If they become direction-less, the
entire system gets upset. The fact is that any change in their Direction creates, metaphysical
& physical diseases.

To understand the physical form of Direction and the diseases that occur due to
these, one can see the body's digestive system. The digestive system expands from oral
cavity to the anus in which oesophagus, stomach, duodenum , jejunum, ileum, caecum,
appendix, ascending-colon, transverse colon, hepatic flexure, splenic flexure, descending
colon, sigmoid colon are included. Important organs like liver, pancreas & gall bladder
have close relation with it. After food is taken, all these organs working in the body become
active and by the help of lungs, heart and kidney produce plasma & blood. This is possible
only when the food keeps moving in its fixed direction from oesophagus to each organ.
When any obstruction occurs in any organ of this system, then its activity is effected & a
series of diseases occur in the body in which both manifested & unmanifested ailments
take place. Pain, vomiting, nausea, head-ache, itching, irritation, burning, acidity, ulcer etc
are manifested. Treatment through the means of direction has proved to be very effective.

Direction is an element in a physical form but it is mainly metaphysical. In its physical
form, itis a part of the brain & spinal-cord, active as a controller/ regulator. An example of
this is the impulse from the brain & to the brain which always flow in a definite direction.
These impulses which flow to & from the brain are the afferent & efferent, of these the
efferent messages flow from the centre to the periphery and the afferent messages flow
from periphery to the centre. Scientists have proved the direction of these, and Ayurveda
has named them as direction element.
