is yang, sadness is yin. Expansion is yang, contraction is yin; fast is yang, slow is
yin. Thus based on the form and function of all live/ inanimate objects, as yin-yang,
treatment by acupuncture therapy can be done.

The fundamental principle of Ayurveda is based on ‘Purush’& Prakriti i.e. the human
being is the synthesis of body, mind, spirit and soul. Deep study of both these is
very much helpful in the development of Ayurvedic Acupressure Treatment.
Yee cea ceanferexct way daearea aael fF ddise weverfSra: 114711

(Shlok-47 Pg.-17 (H))

The purush (human being) — given in the above shloka as lok(cosmos) is known as
Chetan (living) ; this living being is the residence of Ayurveda. The ayurvedic text is
entitled for this puman/ purush only.

4) The Aim of Ayurveda : The purpose of Ayurveda has been clarified in a couplet in
the most ancient scripture of Ayurveda ‘Charak Samhita‘:

“SOS URE (3qgaea) TART TARAS fro a" 112611
(Shlok-26 Pg.-565 (H))

What is the purpose of Ayurveda ? In short , it aims to protect and maintain the
health of the healthy and free the sick from its illnesses.

In brief, it means to protect the health of each living being and destroy all ailments.
Hence, only a healthy person is competent to absorb the pious & eternal teachings
of Ayurveda and can achieve the ultimate object of human, pursuit (pursharth)
through Tapp(meditation), Gyan (knowledge), Bal(vitality).

5) Physical and metaphysical forms are inseperable: The speciality of both the
eastern (Indian & Chinese) medical scriptures, are the studies that have been done
at the level of both physical & metaphysical forms of life. The various physical &
metaphysical symptoms have been shown in the table below:-

[| Physical Metaphysical

[4] Visible visible

Imbibed with touch feeling Without touch feeling
Manifested Non-manifested

Word Meaning
Body Mind (intellect, soul, time, Direction)
expansion, coldness, hotness, emptiness,
permeability
Element Energy (functions & attributes)

Ges: wed ae: qaufdfdgsed 116711
sere eal aif ACA Fal Yararnfecsamad oad 116811
Osi wd ou ateregrRRa a seamed sei a ast A casa 116911

(Shlok-67, 68, 69 Pg.-811 (H))

@
