To understand the physical form of direction one can have the example of the network
of roads in a city which are meant physically for movement of people, vehicles etc. to and
fro as a pathway. These paths are also of several types. Some ina city, link one colony to
another, some from one ward to another, some from one house to another and in same
form or the other, are present as a means of communication. Without a proper sense of
direction (dishabodh), no one can reach the destination by just following a route. If
somebody's sense of direction is inactive or less effective, he always chooses a wrong
route and wastes his time & energy. If the distance between the house & his school is one
kilometer, the student will normally take 15 minutes to cover the distance; but this time will
considerably be maximum if the student loses the way or takes a wrong route, or speed is
slow, again, if he covers the distance running madly, he will cover the distance in much
shorter time but will be wasting his energy; in both the situations, taking more time or less
time indicates an ineffective sense of direction which is directed to the brain. Obviously, in
the body, the physical organ of direction is definitely present as a part of the brain.

Treatment of addictions, through the use of direction element:

1. Character deterioration / loose character : It has been seen generally that in
adolescence, youth looses sense of direction -and become addicted to one or the
other. Some addictions result in downfall of character. All such addiction related
ailments can be treated by direction. In such situations, treatment should be done
on the meridian of the elements, which causes that addiction on the point of direction
of direction meridian.

2. Cigarette smoking : This is related to vaayu which is related to lungs. So its
treatment will be on lungs meridian (Rt SF K- joint) using 2 tone 7 sedate.
Tobacco chewing : Spleen (Rt RF Kapha) joint: 5 tone 7 sedate.

Love addiction : Heart joint meridian (Lt SF K jt) 3 tone 7 sedate.

5. Alcoholism : Mind (Rt MF Kapha joint or Pitta joint or on 8'"Hzm ) 8 tone 7
sedate.

6. Child’s stealing habits: Habit of pushing people in order to make them fall, or
accident, habit of continuous stealing in school, stealing of pen or pencil and money
from home, slowly getting into wrong doings, making family shameful and fearful,
at this age, this type of loss in sense of direction can create very serious mental
diseases. Sometime due to extreme love to the child, mother gets confused and
for the mistakes done by her child, blames other children. In this situation the
treatment of mother and child is possible by the direction. For the child, treatment
should be on meridian of Soul (Lt thumb V jt) 9 tone 7 sedate.

7. Sexual addictions : In young age or in old age, persons who are not satisfied
from their family but indulge in wrong sexual habits are treated by Hypothalamus
meridian (Rt thumb V jt) 1 tone 7 sedate.

Py
