Every element in the world is in the form of a medicine but some of them are
known as great medicines (maha aushadhi). From Kaal to soul all elements, which
are infinite source of energy, are known as great medicines. The following shloka
signifies this importance of each element.
arenas arising sme febaa xeaquenad ai ai gfref a a anfinca |
(Shlok-12, Pg.-471 (H))

Each element is a medicine: There is no element in this universe which is not
composed of five elements and which has not been prepared by a special method and for
a specific purpose. Hence all elements act like medicines.

When an element has a rational use of their residence or its organ, then that element
appears in the form of medicine. What it means is that each element has it’s utility as a
medicine and after identifying it, the person who uses it as such becomes a physician.
Each element has internal strength in the form of medicine and the person who does this
identification is a great evaluator. In Ayurveda philosophers and thinkers gave the form of
element to Time, Direction, Mind, Soul & Origin, but as they are non-manifested metaphysical
elements, their power is infinitely more than the other physical elements.

In the examples of philosophers’ afferent and efferent impulses and those of the
digestive or blood circulation systems, described earlier, all are controlled by direction.
Their flow, if against their normal direction, affects their functions and creating different
types of ailments. In daily life, the word direction is used every moment, e.g. some child’s
direction has gone wrong, or in a game of cricket, the bowler’s direction getting upset is
termed as improper. The term direction is generally also related directly to character. One
whose character is not 0.k. his direction is considered upset. Similarly every type of
intoxication or addiction is treated in Ayurvedic acupressure and approved by scriptures.
This is not merely a subject of curiosity but a powerful method of treatment.

Scientists have taken the measurement of element on the basis of numbers. Our
body is in control of such numbers. Age is governed by numbers, heart palpitation in
numbers, excretion of stool/urine in numbers (per day)and the life saving blood circulation
time in the whole body in 8 seconds are its apparent examples. If these numbers are less
or more, there is trouble for the body. Scientists have termed these numbers in scalar and
vector form. The vector scale not only is indicative of a number but it is also indicative of
direction. For example, between speed & velocity, speed is scalar & velocity is vector.
Between velocity & acceleration, if velocity is vayu, acceleration is direction. Direction is
that energy/force which can change vayu, and is the most powerful of all the previous
