of eye gets affected by light waves. Cordial action of both optic nerve and vision centre
provides visionary knowledge. If imbalance created in one of them, knowledge of chakshu
vaisheshik pitta is affected.

A person grasps very deep minute meaning because of Buddhi vaisheshik aalochak
pitta. Adopt the received meaning and present at a proper time. On the basis of past
memories one creates related desires in future. It creates specific intellect by maintaining
harmony in thought and work. Its area is cavernous sinus in brain, which is a centre of all
sense-organs (eyes, nose, skin, ear and tongue). !n this region there are blood vessels
(eye artery, eye vein etc.) coming to eyes etc. and also nerves. Above this region psycho-
sensory region of brain is situated and near it psycho-motor region. Above mentioned
functions of Buddhi vaisheshik aalochak pitta are regulated by this region of brain.

Symptoms of imbalance of Aalochak pitta :
1) Eye diseases
2) Vision problems
3) Lack of analysis power
4) Power of differentiation
(4) Bhrajak Pitta :

“grorafe wesrerafa avfq, gfe aster’ | (Pg.-379 (H))

The one which brings vitality to the complexion is known as bhrajak pitta.

To maintain the temperature of body making the skin healthy or ugly is the function of
bhraajaka pitta. “caret Wor HSPIcara: Pitta which enlightens the glaze of body resides
in the skin and is called as bhraajaka pitta.Regulation of heat in other organs of body
except skin depends on the needs of metabolism of that specific place. If that organ is
extremely active then the need of oxygen in it is excess and function of fire is strong. In the
body, skin is such a part where regulation of heat and blood circulation is not according to
its need but depends upon the quantity of heat created in whole body. Temperature regulating
centre present in hypothalamus of brain controls the heat and blood circulation in skin.
This centre becomes more active when there is an increase of heat in body resulting
increase of blood circulation in skin and excess heat is expelled out of the body by skin. In
high fever this is the cause of redness in skin.

(22)
