In the modern age, continuous research has been done on the knowledge of direction.
At time of construction of a building, compliance & correction of Vaastu-Dosha is also
based on direction; which part should be in which direction, is obviously based on direction.
In the planning & construction of major dams & bridges, facts affecting them are assessed
and then only the direction is decided. In river waters, the resource that are assessed are
based not only on these parameters & extent but on a specific direction & such an analyst
is called a great- engineer.

Day and night are under time. But their time period, being based on planets & satellite,
are also decided by direction. Hence direction is also a controller of time.

In earlier paragraphs, it has been clarified that direction combines with previous
elements. Fire & water are also controlled by direction. Excessive heat of a raging fire can
be controlled by only reversing the direction of great flame. When water & parthiv are not
able to control a raging fire, then change in direction of that fire remains the only alternative.
When flooded water does not get adequate space & direction, then the entire landmass
comes under the havoc of floods. Similarly, a few particles of water, finding proper direction
create humidity in houses and continue as problems to scientists & engineers.

For treatment of direction, normally the 7" finger/toe of hand/foot i.e. right hand's
middle finger and left foot’s mid toe are available. On these, ten vertical, ten horizontal, ten
spiral meridians are available. And on each hand/foot fingers/toes, 600 points for direction
treatment are plotted. With this, all organ prolapses like ptosis (eye brows dropping), uterus
prolapse, shoulder prolapse, intestinal prolapse, all types of hernia, bone & body part(s),
misalignment, any type of addictions and being an important part of brain, as a controller,
direction points can be very effective in treatment.

8) Mann Element(Mind) :
seer fibers waaaften oR: | geeks are area Piezo fast: fio: |
Seay aeeaTeN aa: Sat Precad| serrated FA: firaraaft area
(Shlok-75-76, Pg.-814 (H))

How is the passive Soul, active? (‘Fiftmerea ftoar aa war feet Herz’) TO eT0 310
1/61) The directions of the writer in response to this question-the mind, though is achetan(non
living),is active and the far living atma/soul is the one which provides chaitanyata(life).
When this soul is in conjugation with mind, all kinds of activities occur. Hence the director
of all activities is known to be the soul because it is living and is known as the doer(karta);
while the mind being non living, is not even known as to be involved in any activities.
