Mind has also been accepted as an element in Ayurveda. Normally people consider
mind as metaphysical. For every work getting completed or not getting completed, people
always talk that mind as being responsible. Poets have termed mind as the emperor, this
concept has basically been enhanced by Ayurvedic concepts. In Ayurveda, mind has
been explained as per follows.

Mind is termed achetan(non-conscious). While activity in it is infinite but it is without
consciousness. Soul is the residence of consciousness. Mind becomes active, after
receiving consciousness from soul, and it is a controlling force, the activity of all the five
elements & time & direction depend on mind for their activity. It is for this reason that poets
call mind as the emperor; this is not an exaggeration but in consonance with its dignity &
importance.

‘sopaay deed qo wre wt (Shlok-19, Pg.-795 (H))

Properties of Mind: There are two properties of mind-

1. Molecular form (anuta) 2. Unity/ Uniformity (ekta)

The main attributes of mind are molecularity and oneness/unity. Anutva represents
its minutest from and Aikatva — oneness which is so very necessary for its activity and for
body's healthy living. An uncertainty of mind, is responsible for doubt, lack of knowledge,
ignorance & unsteadiness and leads to ailments. Mind’s oneness/unity determination leads
to a completely healthy body- healthy mind leads to healthy body. Mind makes a person
passive or creative. As force, mind is a part of brain and like brain’s activeness, is mainly
metaphysical but according to Ayurveda, mind is both metaphysical and physical. Mind’s
functions have been clarified as per the following shloka :

fired frarigg u etd ugeata ul aeBaarra aa aq wd eel |

(Shlok-20, Pg.-796 (H))

Subjects of mind: Thinking, analysis, discussion, aim, determination and all other
topics which are in the realm of mind are the subjects/properties of mind.

Mind's function is of its level; a subject worth thinking, worth examining or using a
rational mind which is undisputable (which is unjustifiable or argumentative), makes a person
also an emperor, like the mind! Contemplation, thinking and reasoning are such functions
of mind whose power makes the person adorable, respectful & exemplary. Contemplation,
meditation, thinking, argument, concentration, determination of a purpose, the power of all
