these, enables a person to create new techniques, philosophy and Contemplation which
becomes exemplary for the society. Mind in bhagwad Gita, and limbic system of brain in
physiology that produces a flood of thought are parallel.

“mind is parallel to the ‘limbic system of the brain’ which is like

-Spring of emotions

-Thoughts

-Ideas ....... flowing incessantly day & night”

Bao Ta SRRATTAY a a aI
afe erator aftresy 4 act |
agrasrret art wear cert acta (Shlok-18, Pg.-793 (H))

Symptoms of Mind: When there is a conjugation of the soul, senses and the subjects
of senses(organs) with the mind, then only knowledge is attained. Hence when there is a
break up in this union, there is lack of knowledge. Thus, the existence of knowledge or
ignorance is a symptom of mind.

Everyone can identify a physical object, but to identify a metaphysical one is not
possible for everyone. In Ayurveda, time ,direction, mind, Soul are metaphysical, of which
soul is the minutest. To accept its form is not easy for everyone. Only true realized souls
can identify it, with the means of symptoms, and then use in treatment accordingly. The
real identification of mind is the presence or absence of knowledge. Knowledge in itself is
a vast, all pervasive, meaningful word. Even though it is metaphysical but is combination
with sense- organs and is combination with the subject of every sense-organ and their
attributes, it collects all information of wide-world and retains knowledge. And this function
of mind establishes it in the form of an element nearest to the soul (Atma). Through the
means of sense-organs & their energy, and being nearest to the soul, the concentration of
consciousness, thus mind has possibility of direct affinity to soul. A lack of combination
results in lack of knowledge. Availability or non-availability of knowledge is an obvious
symptom of mind; and these lead to mental ailments. And the treatment of these is done,
not by medicines, but by the use of psychotherapy. In Ayurvedic acupressure, as per 10-
origin principle, mind has been given the number of eight. When any organ becomes severely
sick, then by treating only that organ, its cure is not possible; but mind which is a part of
brain & since brain is a controller of all organs, then mind’s acupoints can treat the ailment
successfully. As mentioned earlier, mind collects information from sense-organs. If mind’s
state deteriorates by seeing, hearing, fearful, sexy & criminal scenes then it’s relief &
control is possible through the points of mind. Generally, if by seeing/hearing of the sudden
