death of a near & dear one or if one is in distress by some other cause, then he is in
depression. In such a state, by seeing the symptoms of mind, it is possible to ascertain
which organ’s activity has been affected. If some person, or if some specific organ is
severely damaged, then by testing the symptoms of that, then treatment on the related
organ’s meridian and mind acu-points gives relief & cure. Both hyperactivity or under activity
can be causes of depression. In Ayurveda, for treatment, each finger has 30 different
types of meridians (so, in ten fingers 300 meridians) and in this there is one point of mind
which can cure to 300 types of depressions and responsible for related symptoms. During
the last nine months, treatment at sansthaan by these points have been very encouraging
and in the future signals of great hope as un-manifested powerful means of treatment may
develop. Patients of mental ailments suffer from depression resulting in insomnia which is
a strong indication of symptoms based on which very encouraging results have been
obtained.

Mind related disease — history:

Case -1: A senior officer of U.P Government, a chronic patient of diabetes and
hypertension, informed that he’s unable to work according to his capability .He has become
irritated and due to non-fulfillment of work targets he is mentally upset and suffers from
depression .He also stated that despite allopathic treatment for long periods, the symptoms
remain .On his finger no.8 (mind fingerRt MF)-NCH(8)- 9 sedate 8 tone were applied. He
let these points remain for 24 hours. Next day when he met, his happiness was unbelievable!

Similarly after proper diagnosis, on related meridian, by toning point no. 8 and by
sedating vayu and direction (2 sedate,7 tone) several types of depression can be treated.
Normally, for insomnia, on GB joint 2 sedate, 8 tone or on Liv 8Hzm 2 sedate, 8 tone
treatment is used. In serious patients, where same specific organs have also degenerated,
they face depression, at some stage in future. So, on that specific organ’s meridian,
diagnosing the energy of the elements, treatment at point no.8 must be done. As mentioned
earlier, mind receives consciousness from soul & giving it to other elements, creates
capability to work and zest.

Mental constitution:

Based on symptoms, there are three broad mental constitutions: Divine/spiritual
essence (Satvik) Royal essence (Rajsik) and Evil essence (Tamsik) & based on minute
differences, 16 mental constitutions have been identified as below :-

i) Divine/spiritual essence (Satvik) — seven types;

