6)

In the destructive period (pralay kaal), the human being, made up of all components,
starts getting decomposed into five elements. In the origin period, this purush is
created from unmanifested to manifested state while in destructive period , it
again attains the unmanifested form from the manifested one. Surrounded by
the luxuries and bad energies (raj and tam), this human keeps on taking rebirths.
The people who are more engrossed in raj and tam (pleasures and wrong doings)
and in ego, they only remain in the bondage of life and death. Besides them, the
ones who are away from raj, tam and ego and those with predominant satvic/ good
energies, are free from this worldly bondage.

Acupuncture‘s Five Elements, Six Energies and Ayurveda‘s Six Tissues,
Mahabhoot,(Elements), Bhoot (Energy):The cosmos has infinite components;
so has the human being. However only a few components have similarity as
enunciated below:-

7)

a tao Seta: after: ‘Go’ gfe wet SH”

(Shlok-4, Pg.-897 (H))
Bhagwan Atrey said to him-the visible components in this cosmos are infinite. Among
them, some gross factors which have similarity between them, is presented here
as an example. Hey Anivesh! Listen carefully to the detailed description of these
components. The six tissues together are known as lok(cosmos). These six are :
1.Earth, 2.Water, 3.Fire, 4.Air, 5.Space, 6. Unmanifested Brahma. These six tissues
also depict the term Purush(human).
The Chinese Acupuncture is also based with only a slight difference, on the five
element principle. According to it, the human body is made up of the combination of
the five mahabhoot-elements=wood, fire, earth, metal, water. The related
metaphysical forms of these five elements-wind, heat, humidity, dryness, coldness
and the sixth hotness, have been accepted as controllers of the five elements;
Ayurveda has propounded the same as the sixth element “Brahma”.Thus both
Acupuncture and Ayurveda are based on the five elements.
Definition of Life:

atRfarracnian enft shifty Preoreargdera vafdergeead 114211

(Shlok-42, Pg.-14 (H))
The combination of body, senses, mind and soul is called as ayu(life). The synonyms
of ayu are — holding, alive, continuity and bondage.
The proper combination of body, sense-organs, mind and soul is called ‘Ayu/life.*
The body and the organs are composed of five physical elements & these are
perishable and inert. Soul is indestructible, pure and conscious/alert. Therefore,
