and evr
id these
yal and
spiritual
above.
le in life
ebirth &
subject

nergy or
ibject of
wledge
eda.

ditas a
rn days.
thinking
vine, sO

physical and metaphysical. So relief to such organs can be feasible only by the mind. Mind
also controls itself and is also a source of reasoning which develops intelligence in a
person.

Mind observes the sense-organs and their functioning. After that decision of right or
wrong, based on strength or weakness, this creates intelligence in a person.

9) Atma Element (Soul) :
ak fe ad after sporiade| Gayest Usted TGC | |
(Shlok-74, Pg.-814 (H))

Salvation of five elements-When the atma/ soul leaves the body, this physical body
appears to be as a vacant house; it becomes achetan/non living. At this time, only the five
elements remain in it and it is said to be dead or disintegrated into panchtatva.

Body becomes lifeless, and is like a zero or vacuum, when soul leaves the body. At
that time, only five elements as vaayu, fire, earth etc. remain and body converts into five
elements. The togetherness/integration of body and soul is the living being. A person is
known as living being because of soul. It is right to say a dead person Brahmaleen (ultimate

merging of soul into creator Brahma). Body of a person merges into five elements; the soul
merges into ultir ‘~

Js, cana s treea trém pflysicar ponding.’ Wué to royal
essence (raja & tama), een has to fulfil the continuous task of rebirth and death ai
are the obstructions in getting salvation (moksha) to a man. In the absence of r
evil essence, effect of divine essence (satva) is present. Seven types of divine
essence (satva), royal essence (raja) and evil essence (tama) are describec
Complete divine essence is the Brahma (the creator). A person becomes divi
when freed from accumulated works of previous births, a person gets rid of |
death. Soul is a philosophical-concept and expression. From the beginning, it is <
of thought for intellectuals and is as a live as before.

Here, to present soul from philosophical point of view, as a source point of e
its infinite thoughts are possible to present in treatment, it definitely becomes asi
controversy. But the knowledge of Ayurveda is divine/ eternal knowledge. This kn
is like holy speech enunciated by the saints. Soul as an element is a gift of Ayun

Efforts of thousands of therapists and blessings of lacs of patients establishe
proof. Results of the treatment by it, is capable in communicating a hope, in mode

Soul is an element. Its detailed discussion is done in previous paragraph. This
or thought is not only for telling and hearing. The knowledge of Ayurveda is d

