should be followed. Our sansthan has followed it and got benefitted. It seems as a common
statement primarily, to present soul in the form of an element. Perhaps, this subject is very
serious and omnipotent. Accepting that un-manifested, meta-physical is dominant in soul,
but manifested physical in it is zero, this concept is also not right. For example, in a smallest
particle, does the degeneration and division in minute particle stops; probably never. Each
element is changeable and each will go through change and its process is continuously
on. Scientists have declared smallest particles as molecules and atoms but process of
discovering the smallest particles among them is continuous, which we can't see by sense
organs and not by microscope in the form of physical imagination. Why on the basis of this
we assume the smallest particle as an atom? Perhaps many other particles among them
are the smallest one those are non-manifested.

In Ayurveda soul is declared as an element. We are following the thought only. So we
can say-

Atma is subtle and smaller than smallest, which we can perceive. It is, therefore, the
densest form of unmanifested particles with maximum actions, which is responsible for all
activities at macro level in cosmos and micro level in human body. Therefore, being an
element it is most potent in action, omnipotent and omnipresent on account of its subtleness.
Therefore, there is a structure and action in this element. In ascending order of element,
the form/structure reduces but the activity increases. Thus, aakash has vast expanse but
there is little activity. Similarly, aatma has smallest size/form but maximum condensed
form of energy for actions and activities. It is uncountable and unconceivable.

It is most distinguishing feature of Ayurvedic concept that each element starting from
aakash contains the attributes of the preceding elements, i.e., vaayu contains the attributes
of aakash, fire contains the attributes of both vaayu and aakash and so on.

In Chinese acupuncture, there is no such idea in this feature that enhances the vision
and levels of treatment. Among all elements, earth contains the Attributes of Aakash,
Vaayu,Fire and Water. In comparison to Aakash, it has the minimum form among elements.
In sequence, Aakash has maximum expanse and vaayu has little less on account of
distribution on altitudes. Fire has lesser extent in comparison to vaayu but more than water
in the form of temperature maintaining homeostasis all around. In the world, water is 3/4
part and 1/4 is earth and its expanse is lesser than that of water. Similarly we have to
identify the form/structure of time, direction, mind and soul in human body, so as to use
these energies for treatment of the afflictions related to such elements. In fact, by virtue of

3)
