this preceding form and more action, all the four (meta physial elements) account for the
nervous system, which is divided into brain, spinal cord and sciatic nerves which manifests
the existence of nerves from head to toe, i.e., all pervading in the whole of the body, no
single cell in the human body is without it.

Nervous system is the controller of all systems and responsible for all activities inside
the body and for perceiving all activities taking place outside, i.e., the cosmic heat and cold
and air is perceived by this nervous system and as such it establishes the link between
atmosphere inside and outside. Thus, heat stroke or cold waves can cause a number of
disease symptoms.

In case of brain damage, the patient starts losing consciousness and lands in, partially
or fully. Sometimes cold sweeps the land and by virtue of it there are lots of disease
symptoms from acute to chronic afflicting the persons of low profile, which is all handled by
nervous system; time, direction, mind and soul considering the nature and gravity of the
disease. The disease symptoms on account of cosmic factors controlled by time is known
as specific branch of time acupuncture and here from time onwards, it is a sublime form of
treatment which needs understanding the concept of time, direction, mind and soul in totality.
In physical form, the body’s, nervous system is controlled by the biological clocks fitted in
the human brain and the generation of the impulse (efferent) from the brain and receiving
from the periphery as the afferent impulse is known as direction. The cerebellum, pons-
constitutes the part of the brain which can be termed as direction, because of the factum
that the direction defines the condition of the patient and the gait and balance of the body is
maintained by cerebellum which is manifested as direction. If the gait is not proper, man
cannot move properly and may have a fall and similarly cerebellum is responsible for
maintaining the balance of the body. Now cerebrum as the seat, residence of mind, i.e., the
midbrain and limbic system constitutes together as mind which is responsibie for all activities
and charged always by nucleus of brain, i.e., the seat of soul. Nucleus is the most hidden,
non-manifested, smallest segment of human body, which is the seat of soul.

According to Ayurvedic concept, the integration is essential altogether. Here in
Ayurveda, there is residence of every element and it is inseparable by its energy, by virtue
of its attributes and actions which are responsible for all activities, independently or
cumulatively. Therefore, the study of human brain, its anatomy and physiology provides
the substantial basis for treatment for time, direction, mind and soul energies which are
capable of purifying the body, removing the toxins, and countering the cosmic factors,
