therefore enhancing the immune system and capable of controlling all diseases from acute
to chronic in nature.

Soul is nothing but the part of God which is only one, whereas its components are
infinite in number, i.e., infinite number of souls residing in infinite number of living beings
which are of the different species maybe human, plants and trees, animals and insects,
etc. This subject may also be treated at length in next volume of the book but all the souls

are the non-manifested particles of that one great God (parmatma).

wre aren | a fafaet star oA al
: (P9.-27 (H))

The residence of knowledge is known as atma/soul. It is of two types — jeev atma,
param atma. Among this, the param atma is only one, as god. The jeev atma is different in
different physical bodies , and it is also omnipresent and omnipotent.

It is natural; presence of symptoms and attributes of god are there in each particle
which separated out from the god. So how can the non-manifested be different from non-
manifested particle? But that soul which resides in each different body, is different in nature.
God is an omniscient, which is one in each body, but cause of residence of soul is elaborated
and also has regularity.

People assume soul as shapeless and virtueless. Without shape and form, which
form shall be discussed. Soul has shape. Whereas the question about its featureless is
there, soul is a source of non-manifested energy, but due to metaphysical reasons. Mind is
its cause. Its function is only to provide vitality. As defined in shlok written below-

aronf wt ghagiseitaanth al aq: watts af den gfeta g 11
do: vada af ypreen aga way! dang add wd aaa ake PsA |
(Shlok-56, 57, Pg.-808 (H))

Analysis of atma as cause- The medium “karan’/indriyas are the mann/mind, budhi/
intellect and budhi-indriya/sense and action organs. The doer “karta” is atma/soul, which in
conjugation with indriyas, produces knowledge and this is called budhi/intellect. The jeev
atma alone is not capable of doing any work; neither it can alone receive/bear the karm
phall/results of deeds. All this only happens by the togetherness of atma and indriyas ;
without this no work can be performed.

Soul does all work by the help of workers and due to this is called as doer. Soul is a
vital, non-manifested energy for which nothing is impossibie. So human being is a source
