the metaphysical form i.e. it disintegrates into its components. Encaged in the cycle of raj/
luxury and tam/evils, it keeps on taking rebirths .

Living being has body which from non-manifested become manifested and again at
the time of death from manifested to non-manifested means merges into their own elements.
Person always rotates like a wheel, ina sequence of rebirth and death surrounded by the
virtue of materialistic (raja) and evil or dark (tama). For the treatment it divides the
circumference of a wheel into ten parts whose lowest part is darkness (tama) and highest
point is lightness which means death quotient. Nomenclature of it is origin (tama), aakash,
vaayu, fire, water, earth, time, direction, mind and soul. Ten parts of this wheel are the
particles of almighty god. Non-manifested soul, starts its journey of life in manifested form.
Their description and the knowledge related to them can be obtained by these 10 origins.
Information of these origins in the form of body and cosmos is universal, which is described
in the shlok written below-

Witeneracid a wdele wrqueaa: Be sex: WySTIT |
(Shlok-7, Pg.-899 (H))

The person who sees the whole world within himself and himself within the whole
world has pure intellect originating in him.

The message of Ayurveda, message of saints that the whole world is a family, and
the message of Geeta by Lord Krishna as in above Shloka, if we understand all these as a
law of God (Brahma-sutra) and acknowledge that we ourselves are the cause of cur sadness
and pain then we will never proclaim others as culprits. Whether it be quarrels at homes or
differences in feelings among countries, all will turn fine. If a person will know himself, it will
finish his feelings of criticising others, affection-jealousy, attachment, doubt and sadness.
Feelings of brotherhood, harmony, friendship, love and welfare will establish. In this diseased
time (kaliyuga) there is no need to fear, but only by the hearing of the celestial point of view
of Ayurveda all sins could be destroyed. By following this, humans even when bounded by
materialistic (raj) and evil (tam) will move towards the truth and reach the position of saint.
When the hearing is so effective, then the results of energy flowing through vital points are
away from the acceptance/non-acceptance of human beings.

Message of Ayurveda is not treatment, but the divine message of brotherhood in the
world (vishva bandhutva), which is the message of the great God. It is our belief, that this
message should be proven to be helpful in removing sadness from all the persons of the
whole world.
