Elaborate description of soul has been given due to keeping in mind treatment
specifically. Some of its example could be path of treatment. The destruction of a person's
brain or his specific organs (like kidney, heart, liver, lungs, spleen, etc.) for some reason or
unconsciousness before death, sometimes gives the indication of death. Sometimes it
shows the symptoms of a disease and gives the message that the person's death is near.
Lightness is the knowledge of soul. Its energy has been named as lightness; as the state
of coma deepens, consciousness decreases and darkness increases. This is the nature
of the central soul of the body. In case of renal failure, if according to blood test, serum
creatinine is 10, it means that the soul of kidney gets partially destroyed at the level of 5
and completely destroyed at the level of 10. In such a case, lightness point of the kidney
meridian should be toned and 9 in 9Vm/9Hzm of lightness (9) should be toned. Central soul
is present in a definite form in each organ of the body. When both of them will unite, it will
result in the combination with God else soul of kidney will leave the central soul of the
body. Similarly, all Yin organs have a central soul. So, there are infinite souls in the body.
Itis universally applicable. 300 meridians have been pointed in our hands. With the addition
of legs, there are 600 in total. The whole body can be kept healthy only by 10 points.

10) Tam Element (Origin) :

Whether it be the origin of the universe or that of the human body or any organism,
universal treatment is available for everyone. Only on the basis of these symbols, whatever
statements are being made, they are not only useful for philosophy but for treatment as
well. It has been tried to follow these. According to Vedic beliefs, age of the universe has
been divided into four Yuga (Satyuga, Dvaapar, Tretaa, Kalyuga) and is of 43 lakh years.

Their classification is as follows:

1) Satyuga -—  17,28,000 years

2) Dvaapar - 8,64,000 years

3) Tretaa - 12,96,000 years

4) Kalyuga - 4,32,000 years

In this sequence, the age of a person has been defined as follows:
1) Kalyuga on 100 years

2) Dvaapar — 200 years

3) Tretaa -— 300 years

4) Satyuga — 400 years
