gat gt entare: stor daa! yore yore cites: wetted |
Maced Tl afer Wace: arayl VATS: wre aa AAA |
(Shiok-25, 26, Pg.-682 (H))

Loss of religion and age as per Yug- In every Yug, i.e. after satyug, the level of
religion was lost to one step lower. Due to loss of religious beliefs, the natural properties of
the five elements also became less potent. This affected the human beings and their survival
becomes difficult. In this mannar, pralay / destruction appears. As the 100 years of a yug
passes away, the humanly age reduces to 1 year.

After the end of (4,32,000/100) 4320 years in Kalyuga, the age of man will come down
to 99 years. This sequence of universe moves continuously according to the cycle of
creation and destruction. It is very much necessary to get the information of destruction
before creation. At the time of destruction, everything destroys. Each type of form combines
after destruction and it is not possible to identify specific living being/type of living being,
which we call as darkness. All origins destroy and dissolve in it. All natural activities keep
taking place and first of all due to collision among all origins, ‘sound’ (shabda) is generated.
For the expansion of sound touch, from touch ignition, from destruction of ignition water
which again adopts dense form. Inflammation of fire lowers and transforms into water,
which further combines with other elements and converts into earth. In this mannar,
sequence of universe originates again and again after completing its time.

Similarly, origin of a person since non-manifested birth to death and again at the micro-
level, creation and destruction of cells also completes this sequence. Hence, there are
infinite cells in the body. Even if their number lowers, the body is visible. The body destroys
only by the continuous destruction of cells. Similarly, production and destruction of blood
cells have a definite sequence. If the age of blood cell is 200 days, then each day they
destroy and originate.

The age of blood cells is comparable to Yuga in which they reside. The age of man is
120 years then again sequential construction of Yuga continues. In the sequence of
construction of age, production of cells and their destruction afterwards — this is a natural
degeneration according to nature. But destruction before time creates anaemia. If creation
is normal and destruction is in excess, this also creates anaemia. In children, this type of
imbalance from the time of birth creates life-threatening disease like thalassemia. It is clear
that in the previous age of a man natural sequence is continuous in each organ but in the
first stage it is excessive while in the last stage it is deficient. Hence, degeneration and
