(5) Pachaka Pitta :

‘qafe srery sf, area"! {Pg.-379 (H))
The one which digests food is known as pachak pitta. Its place is duodenum. It is in
the form of fire and unmanifested.

Digestion is the function of balanced pitta. Pachaka pitta divides the food into refined
part (raw material for blood) and waste (stool) by digesting the food. If the digestion of food
does not take place in a proper way, then the digestive functions occurring in other tissues
of body and the working of the other four pitta gets imbalanced. Due to it being constantly
functional in the body, tissues keep on degenerating. So, for the fulfilment of this degeneration
and its further growth, there is a constant need of nutrients. This supply is fulfilled by the
food we eat. After the digestion of the eaten food by the ‘Paachakagni’ (digestive fire), the
body can utilise it. Healthy food taken in proper quantity and at a proper time gets converted
into plasma (anna-rasa) and wastes, that is, stool and urine get separated.From this plasma
(anna-rasa) repairing, building and growth of all other tissues of the body take place. If
digestive fire gets imbalanced, then defective plasma would be produced and all body
tissues gradually degenerate. Hence, the function of digestive fire has been stated to be
the most important among all the body fires. Other fires are dependent on this and due to
this, age, strength, colour, zeal, glow, vitality (ojas), radiance and life-energy (prana) are
maintained.

When the fire (heat) calms, the person dies. If the digestive fire (paachaka-agni) is in
healthy state and balanced, then man stays healthy and lives a long life. However, if this
fire is imbalanced (dull, sharp or unequal) then man becomes sick. Hence, digestive fire is
said to be the basis of a healthy life.

Symptoms of Imbalance of Paachaka Pitta :

(1) Ulcers

(2) Heartburn

(8) Indigestion

(4) Addictions

(5) Cravings

(6) Destroys micro-organisms (microbes)-macrophages
(7) Destroy toxins in G.1.T.

(8) Helps directly & indirectly formation of blood

(23)
