when the Aatma/soul, through the mind, is related to the sense-organs & body, then

the body shows symptoms of vitality which appear in the form of symptoms of life.

Then the body is affected by happiness/sufferings, benevolent/harmful elements,

attributes & functions. The group of four—body, sense-organs, mind and soul are

called Purush (living-being). Thus when the four, above named combine and become

regular then life comes into existence.Synonyms of Ayu/life are continuity(nityag),

to hold[dhari], liveliness(jeevitam] & bondage(anubandh).

Meaning-Togetherness of the five elements is known as purush(living being).

The group of five-elements and soul is also called Purush (living-being). Efforts are

made for the good health of the living-being ( Purush) and to cure him when he

becomes ill. In Ayurveda, suffering itself is called disease. Life and death, hunger

and thirst, sleep etc. are natural diseases. For natural activities, they are essential.

For fever or other physical and mental disturbances etc. the knowledge of natural

activities in the body is essential.

Ayurvedic medicine—Bio-Energy centres in body:

Inquisitiveness arises about :-

(1) | Elements and Energy-inter relationship?

(2) What is Energy?

(3) What is life?

(4) Ayurveda—ultimate, without boundaries & infinite-why?

(5) By Which element we feel happiness and by which we feel sadness?

(6) | What is favourable and non-favourable?

(7) | Which elements are beneficial & which are non-beneficial?

(8)  Dead/living, fullness/emptiness, yin/yang-why this duality?

(9) From the point of view of benevolent life—what is to be done and what is not
to be done?

(10) From which things one has to be cautious for physical and mental health?

The above inquisitiveness, sometimes or the other, would definitely arise in the

minds of those,who are on the path of Ayurveda's divine-knowledge seekers. Doubts

& this or that thought process does make a person go astray from his path but they

generally take him to the true destination.

Meaning — By doubts, knowledge is attained; this destroys the doubtful state.

This questioning spirit will definitely give a push to the flow of Ayurvedic Acupressure's

thought process and on its basis, this infinite stream of knowledge will flow in the

next chapter and the knowledge seekers will bathe in this stream and move with a

positive force towards the true objective of their life. This we firmly believe.

Energy is the medicine of Ayurvedic Acupressure, whose source is the Soul

(Atma) : In Acupuncture treatment therapy, bio-energy has been accepted as a

medicine but scientists have yet not given it their acceptance. Also, according to

Go
