Common Functions of Kapha :
‘Se ae: Reed od gee aera! ann efter waaffeersr! |’
(Shlok-51, Pg.-379 (H))
Functions of stable kapha — The kapha in stable condition produces the following
properties- smoothness, good condition of joints, stability, heaviness, able to perform sex,

maintains strength of body, patience, tolerance and lack of greed.

Lubrication, cohesion, coordination among different structures, stability, and firmness
in body organs, heaviness, strength, forgiveness, patience and non-greediness in body
are the functions of balanced kapha. Balanced kapha provides strength to the body and
hence is called force. Balanced kapha in the body is called ojas (vitality) and imbalanced

kapha is cause of diseases.

“feet scfife west aretsi yfespd” Force is of three types- 1) Sahaja 2) Kaalaja 3)
Yuktikrit. The natural force of the body is known as sahajabala(strength created easily).
The force achieved by the effect of season and time and according to age is known as
kaalajabala (strength created by time). According to seasons, humans feel weakness in
the start of rainy and the end of summer season. In between these two, medium force is
present while in Hemanta/Shishira (Dec/Jan) season, it is at its peak. One more form of
kaalaja bala is due to difference in the stages of childhood, youth and old age.

The force generated by the combination of food, lifestyle and effort is known as
yuktikrita bala (strength achieved by method). It is an achieved force. The fluid part of the
body provides the important matters required for the repairing, fulfilment and growth of all
tissues of the body. All the functions of every cell depend on the nutrients received from
the intracellular and extracellular body fluids present in them. From these nutrients, each
cell synthesises useful nutrients for themselves. Kapha is the doer of all the anabolic
reactions of the body. It maintains the physical and mental force through its balanced
functions. It protects the body from decay, degeneration and infection and maintains the

osmotic pressure of body fluids.

