9)

10)

Atma is studied in combination with panchmahaboot (Akash, Vayu, Agni, Jal, Prithvi)
and Kaal, Disha, Mann; Atma i.e. 9 dravyas— segments. In the same mannar scientists
define energy in combination with power, work, force, distance, time, mass, velocity
& acceleration. Here again 9 factors are there for studying atma.
Ten Elements(dravya) in Ayurveda :
wreraren Aa: Set fava cereeEl Brad deri wed, Pearcy 114811
(Shlok-48, Pg.-18 (H))
Akash (space) and other Panchmahabhoot (aakash, vayu, agni, jal, prithvi), atma
(soul), mann (mind), kaal (time) and disha (direction) are the nine dravyas / elements.
This element group is divided into two sections- 1. Chetan (living) are those dravyas/
elements which have sense organs/ indriyas and 2. Achetan ( non living) are those
dravyas which have no sense organs i.e. are nirendriya.
Five Elements:Like in classical Acupressure/Acupuncture in Ayurvedic
Acupuncture also, the basis of origin of body (apart from other elements), have
been accepted as the five elements. In different system or thoughts of Acupuncture,
no definite sequence of the five elements has been seen. In Ayurveda, however,
the five elements have been serially listed as akash (space), vayu (air), agni (fire),
jal (water), prithvi (earth) as indicated in the following shloka.
meryeniy @ argeftaera: feaferecrem| erex: wrefeer wd of Ce) WT TAT: ||

(Shlok-27, Pg.-799 (H))
The names and properties of mahabhoot /elements -1.Akash(space) 2. Vayu(air)
3. Agni(fire) 4.Jal(water) 5.Prithvi(earth) are the five mahabhoot / elements. Their
properties/ gunn are respectively — 1.Shabd(sound) 2.Sparsh(touch) 3.
Roop(appearance) 4. Ras(taste) 5. Gandh(smell).

asMey: yal grafts: ot ot) oe: Geda wast gftrg SAI |

(Shiok-28, Pg.-799 (H))
In these mahabhoot, the element with only one property “shabd(sound)” is akash.
In the next dravya/element, the gunn/property of the previous dravyas are included.
Hence the ‘later elements’ have more properties than the ‘former elements’ . in
sequence.
In the above, five elements have been placed in a definite sequence. Their energies
are respectively sound (shabda), touch (sparsha), colour (roop), taste (rasa), smell
(gandha). In classical Acupuncture, based on the attributes of the physical elements,
the related energies are respectively wind, heat, humidity, dryness and coldness
and above all of them is the one controller energy — hotness. Certainly, the elements,
their attributes, matter, and their energies are almost similarly imagined but with

(zs)
