death is very much possible. But death does not happen before time, so that the life can be
lived — this is our great righteousness.

When we talk about ‘combination’, then we also talk about ‘nearest’ and ‘distant
combination’. Often, people can’t understand that why a mother is much nearer compared
to father. When a son gets married, then he is nearer to his wife comparable to his father.
When a new member (daughter-in-law) comes in a family, then instead of accepting her,
there is an absence of knowledge for non-acceptance. This indicates towards the nature
of soul. Mother always wants to be the mother. She was once a wife also. Soul is known
as consciousness. She herself will have to find the reason behind her sadness.

This is also a very important subject of treatment. Daughter-in law has been considered
as parasite and accused of all sadness; this is comparable to the divorce between soul
and mind. When soul combines with them, they become sad. These parasites are of micro
or macro structure and it is necessary to consider the fact that for how long they can stay
in the body and how much damage they can do. If the members of the family start to
distrust each other, then the whole atmosphere of the family gets infected. This too is
infection even though it appears unreasonable. It is clear that any state of imbalance infects
rapidly. But when there is evil in the mind, its infection spreads with the speed of light in the
entire body. This is why expansion of an infection is being considered as 9"" origin. The
way bacteria, viruses or different parasites spread a disease once they enter the body is
unimaginable. It is being named as infection. It is a body-affecting disease of the modern
world which gives birth to acute and chronic diseases alike. Its treatment protocol by 0/9 is
being given in the following pages.

Ten origin Concept:

The above ten elements have been classified and elaborated. They are redepicted
here in a sequenced mannar to understand their use in treatment. The basis of development
of this cycle are the 0,9 energies which represent tam and atma respectively. In this ten
origin concept, the 0-9 numbers of mathematics are included , out of which infinite numbers
could be built up. Thus the ten elements are represented by a number; based on the property
of the elements, they are placed in a chronological order as 0= tam, 1= akash etc. Also
their sequence in the cycle is such that the active energies are placed on one side (2,3,6,7)
while the passive energies are on the other side (1,4,5,8) . In this mannar, this creative
cycle was originated.
