iii) Hypertension(HBP) iv) Hypotension (LBP)

v) Pareses vi) Paralysis

vii) Joint pain vill) Coughing

ix) Restricted urine x) Constipation

xi) Difficult delivery xii) Numbness

xiii) Affections of thought process xiv) Mental retardation

xv)  Infertile seizures xvi) Epilepsy

xvii) Flickering eyes xviii) Muscular disease (acute & chronic)
xix) Tachycardia & bradycardia xx) All nervous functions

xxi) All heart diseases

Pitta :

Due to the interplay of water and fire elements Pitta is created. Pitta controls the
temperature. This also has three stages-excess, deficient and balanced. Excess and
deficient are called imbalanced and creates diseases. A healthy life exists in a definite
temperature. Either body or in universe, 2/3 part of it is fluid. Balance in body fluid is
maintained due to daily water intake, absorption and excretion. In all of them if only one
activity does not take place properly, body fluid increases or decreases and body has
diseases. When the body temperature increases evaporation takes place as usual. Both
the states lead to indication of a disease. In Chinese Acupuncture both water and fire
elements have been seen separately but in Ayurveda even viewing separately, two elements
combine and create Vaata, Pitta and Kapha-Tridosha, is a unique speciality of Ayurveda
which is not found elsewhere and in chronic diseases it provides an easy solution for
treatment. Here pitta can be understood by another example—take some water in a
container, boil it on fire, after some time water evaporates and finally container becomes
black after burning. Similarly, when fire in the body increases, there is deficiency of water
in the body and due to this some parts of the skin become rough, black and uneven.
According to Chinese Five Element Theory,- after seeing the Blackish-skin, diagnosis is,
water element (coldness energy) in excess and treated likewise will not be correct i.e. to
reduced Pitta ,water element will have to be increased and fire element will have to be
decreased. Thus, if the skin of the body turns into dark shades, it is an indication of deficiency
of water element. Similarly if the stool is black, it shows excess of fire element.
