Pitta governs digestion, absorption, assimilation, nutrition, metabolism, body
temperature, skin coloration, luster of eyes and also intelligence and understanding.
Psychologically, pitta arouses anger, hate and jealousy.

Enzymes and hormones are connected with pitta and it is predominantly responsible
for hormonal disorders in the body at various levels. Pitta is connected with glaze, radiance
and glowing of body. Pitta disorder is conclusive factor for affecting these enzymes and
hormones. Enzymes are mainly secreted by different organs of Gastro Intestinal Tract
(GIT) consisting of stomach, small intestine, liver and pancreas in varying quantity with
varying acidity and alkalinity. Five arrangements of organs in GIT has alternating secretions
hot or cold in nature i.e. Acidic or Alkaline so as to restore balance in the body. When
acidic tone increases, it causes — ulcers, gastritis, heating-up of the body, inflammations
with redness on various joints, itching and irritable syndromes. Heat is connected with
expansion and includes the nature of wind. For example, when any solid (metal) is heated
up, it is converted in liquid and burns out the impurities, toxins. Thus, heat is known as
purifying agent and like fire its growth is upwards. Thus, intrinsic attributes can be
summarised as follows which are valuable for diagnostic as well as treatment purpose —

1. Coversion, changes 2. Tranformation

3. | Upward movement

5. Purifying (removing toxins on
physical and metaphysical planes)

7. Maintain glaze and radiance of
skin and all body parts

9. All enzymes and hormones basically
are hot in nature and are connected
with heat.

Disorders of Pitta

All types of fevers
Leucoderma
Jaundice

Ulcers

Arthritis

Cenicitis

a= ONO YS
2 PFD

=

10.
12.

4. Expansion

6. Metabolism control

8. Temperature of body — essential
ingredient of homeostasis of body

10. Pitta controls all body fluids in
conjugation with temperature and

water as such, very important for
control of life cycle.

Eczema
Diabetes
Acidity
Gastritis
Nephritis
Appencicitis
