13. Colitis 14. Albuminaria

15. Haematuria 16. Pimples

17. Heat rashes 18. Thyroiditis

19. Haemoglobin 20. Anaemia

21. Skin disorders 22. Loss of memory

23. Mental weakness
Kapha:

Kapha force is produced after interplay among earth and water elements. This force
is equally responsible for creation and destruction. When this force is in balanced form
then fat (adipose- tissue), bones, bone-marrow, semen and muscles properly develop in
the body otherwise in all these tissues, it creates defects and results in different type of
diseases.

Scientists have decided acidic and alkaline nature of every secretion, fluids and
excretions in the body. Its proper percentage is must for the growth of body-organs, body-
parts etc. Opposite to this absence of this percentage creates many diseases. During
interplay among each element their energies and intrinsic factor also interplay. So if there
is imbalance in quantity and quality of an element, its components are imbalanced too and
they give information of different type of diseases.

For example-if blood becomes acidic, the skin diseases like eczema, rashes, itching,
skin diseases, psoriasis, leucoderma, acidity, indigestion, gastric-trouble, haemophilia,
ulcers, etc. pitta related ailments occur. If alkaline percentage is excess in blood then
nodes, adhesion, stone-formation, calcification, tumours, cysts, fibroids, T.B. and cancer
are possible to happen.

At energy level in earth (prithvi) and water(jala), hear(shabda), touch(sparsh),
appearance (roop), taste(rasa) and smell(gandh) all are included, therefore when Kapha is
imbalanced, structure, physique and functions, all are equally affected. Every secretion
and excretion of body have specific smell and on the basis of smell only, level of diseases
which enters in the body, can be diagnosed. Pathological- test reports of blood, stool and
urine creates a revolution in diagnosis of diseases, but on the other hand, on the basis of
smell, diagnosis of effected organs or parts of body are possible. But it is possible after,
one has great experience. A patient can himself assess his ailments based on the smell of
his body, stool, urine, sweat and mouth and patient must also inform his doctor or therapist
about these specific smell. Strong smell reflects vaata diseases, sour or bitter smell pitta
dosha and rotten or foul smell indicates kapha dosha. Investigation at five, six and eight
levels of these smell, is a subject of detailed knowledge, which can even tell the stages of
cancer, but of course this is a subject of intensive study and experience.
