vast difference. In Ayurveda, the attributes or energies of the five elements have
been called bhoot and tanmaatra (energy). The most important quality is that in
each element, the attribute of the previous element is said to be involved. Akash’s
attribute is sound, vayu’s attribute is touch but in vayu both sound and touch are
included. Attribute of fire is roop but in it, both the attributes of previous elements are
included viz. sound and touch. Similarly, the attribute of water is fluidity (rasa), and
attribute of earth is smell and in it all the attributes of previous four elements sound,
touch, colour and taste are included.
Energies are five — Sound, touch, colour, taste and smell. Each energy has only
one attribute and that too non-manifested. Sound manifests akash, by the help of
sound, touch(vayu) is manifested which has touch energy, with the help of sound
and touch, colour (fire) is manifested; with the help of sound, touch and colour
energy, rasa (water) is manifested; with the help of sound, touch, colour and taste
energy, smell (earth) is manifested. The akash, vayu, agni, jal and prithvi thus
generated are known as mahabhoot (element).In the elements, the attributes are
manifested. The manifested attributes are accepted by the sense organs and in the
body they are received by the sense organs. If each attribute of an element is
examined, it can easily be found to be the subject matter of our sense organs viz.
ears, skin, eyes, tongue and nose. The combination of elements and energy is
actually the combination of the body of five elements and sense organs. This is a
more rational, thought producing and scientific point of view because the soul of
Ayurveda as a principle is defined in the following shlok.
 Rierraeniam en sifaaq Pemeaqdera gaftergecdl |

(Shlok 42, Pg.-14 (H))
In Ayurveda, the combination of body (five elements), senses, mind and soul is
called age or life. Other synonyms of age are continuity, liveliness, bondage (related
with other bodies) and to hold.
There are two systematic sequences of the five elements: ascending and
descending. Ascending order of elements is from akash to earth and descending
order is from earth to akash,as has been elaborated.
Ascending order of elements: akash, vayu, agni, jal, prithvi
Descending order of elements: prithvi, jal, agni, vayu, akash
Energy in Chinese Acupuncture in reality corresponds to the energy related to an
element. Element is called mahabhoot in Ayurveda. In energy, there is no possible
measurement and the substance which does not have a measurement, it is
impossible for its visible existence.

Gs)
