5) Tissue Formation & Nutrition :

After the creation of the body, in its maintenance, food has an important contribution,
whatever we consume as food, it gets separated into useful and waste products. The
waste product is excreted out in the form of stool and urine and the useful product gets
converted into nutrients. From tissues, sub-tissues and wastes are also created. According
to Ayurveda-

Tae dal Are Arash a) seal Aso Tea: Ep ore we WATS!
VaR Rd cet Tepe: SVS RT| AGM cae Ie w Aaa: SATSTA: |1
(Shiok-16-17, Pg.-553 (H-2))
Origin sequence of tissues- There is a sequential development from ras/plasma of
rakta/blood, rakta to maans/muscle, maans to maed/flesh. maed to asthi/bone, asthi to
majja/bone marrow, majja to shukra/semen and then origin of the foetus. The next tissue
developed is the outcome of the nutrients of the previous tissue.

Updhatu- There is also the origin from ras/plasma — breasts and menses in females,
from rakta/blood- ligaments, veins; from maans/muscle- fat, 6 layers of skin; and from
maed/flesh-nerves.

According to Ayurveda, from plasma blood is created, from blood flesh is created,
from flesh adipose is created, from adipose bones are created, from bones bone-marrow
is created and from bone-marrow semen is created-these all are created in sequence.
\rrespective of scientific point of view, Ayurvedic concepts are divine and natural. After tne
birth, human beings receive energy from food, and this is true. All the tissues are formed,
by food only.

(1) Ras/Plasma and Rakta/Blood Tissue:

Harmonious activity of digestive system prepares the basis of complete vitality (life-
force). Scientists also accept that blood is created by the means from food, but there is
difference of opinion in that sequence, in which plasma creates blood, blood creates flesh
etc. After the acceptance of divine point of view, its review in course of time becomes clear
itself and results into a definite change in opinion. It is true, that reproductive tissue is
formed by food, yet it is also right that, in its formation-its qua‘ity and quantity dependent on
several other factors. Digestive system- which has mouth, oral cavity, teeth, tongue, palate
etc. and after several glands, oesophagus, stomach, duodenum, small-intestine etc.
components are there. Appendix and parts of large- intestine and two important glands,
Liver/ Pancreas perform several functions, and produce plasma from food, plasma to blood
