etc. If such a vast system is not functioning properly, then it can be responsible for acute
and chronic ailments.

Hence, it is very necessary from scientific point of view, to study the tissue formation
process in the body. In Ayurveda its infinite formula, infinite organ and similarity principle
(correspondence) of human body are present. Hence, in most natural way of thinking, one
can easily understand production of blood from plasma, flesh from blood and so on. In the
body, production cycle and the reproduction cycle always function like that of Cosmos.
Many organs of Digestive system, during the time of creation of tissues, produce different
types of local chemicals and local hormones, which enables the food to be digested. After
digestion, its colour and form changes. During the process of production, main products,
bye-products, and wastes- all the three have important role. For example- in the production
of sugar, sugarcane is a raw material as food. Thereafter sugar is main product, molasses
is the bye-product and sugarcane waste is the waste product, and these are the natural
components of the process. In the same manner, all the systems present in the body, on
the basis of their coordinated functions, produce tissues, sub-tissues and wastes which
will be clear from the table. In this table, by seeing the form and colour of the stool, one can
get the knowledge of defective and imbalance tissues. The breast and menses are the
bye-product of plasma in females and its waste is kapha. When the digestive system is not
producing plasma from food in proper manner, then sub-tissues and waste are also affected.
Excess excretion of sputum in the form of waste, is the indication of production of tissues
like plasma etc. As we all know, in the process of production, fire plays an important role.
Any laboratory and industry cannot produce, without fire. There are 13 types of fire in the
body according to Ayurveda- five elements has their five fire, seven from seven tissues
and one is the stomach-fire (jatharaagni). Adequate quantity of fire is essential for the
production of plasma, tissues and sub-tissues. Only, when fire of each organ is in harmony,
process of growth of body is balanced in which all tissues are capable to protect and
support the body.

Plasma in coordination with the result of time is responsible for the menses and
production of milk in females. According to physiology, controller of each system is hormone-
system in the body. Either male or in female child, production of semen or starting of
menses is decided by time (kaal). Between 11 to 15 years of age, by the coordination of
thymus gland, pituitary and gonads, formation, production and re-production of tissues
continues. Here, it is very important that these are natural sequences and accordingly
from plasma to semen, each tissue depends on it. ‘DhaarnaatDhaatavah’" i.e. which adopts
it, is called tissue.
