Origin of element by energy-In the beginning of creation, there is no acceptable
fact about the sequence in which the energy arose from the elements. The proofs of
celestial elements are the vedas (shruti). “sreifisesg acdy sarer ot syfer”

Hence, according to scriptures, after the complete annihilation, when from the non-
manifested Brahma, the cosmos was created, then akash, diodes from the duo
combination éf atoms and triodes from the trio combination were formed. Triodes
get visibility even though they remain invisible to the practical eye; for example,
fragrance of a good smelling substance is felt in the room from a distance, even
though particles of that substance are not visible even by a microscope. They are
extremely minute; even then, the sense organ receives them. So, the macro akash
is created from the micro akash element, from the help of akash element and vayu
energy, vayu element is created and in this sequence, with the help of earlier energies,
later elements respectively are created. Akash, vayu, agni, jal and prithvi elements
become identifiable after creation and get registered as five elements. These five
elements create the varying elements in the entire universe. All the macro and the
micro to the minute physical elements are created by specific combination of these
five elements. Therefore, all the physical elements are called as made of five elements
(panchbhautik). A substance gets known by that element which is in excess in that
element. For example, akashiya element (spacious), vayaviya (airy), agneya (firey),
jaleeya (watery), parthiv (earthly).

Attributes of each element- Main attributes of earth is solidification, water is fluidity.
air is mobility, fire is heating, and akash is non-resistance. The introduction of each
element is not one-sided. Their residence is in the form of matter, common and
specific attributes, and finally as an integrated entity.If we study an element, then
we are able to identify it and on that basis, it is feasible 70 diagnose the elements of
the body. Perhaps, in relation to the five-element and their energies, their identification
and definition has been done in various treatment therapies, but is not as broad
based as in Ayurveda. Hence, for a broader conceptual understanding of the
elements, six types of description have been given hereunder in this chapter.
Each substance in cosmos is made of Five-elements (It is an eternal truth) —
Scientists have so far discovered 124 basic elements and the search for more is
still on. There is a similarity in the constitution of these elements. Each element has
atoms and each atom has electrons, protons and neutrons. Difference in between
the atoms of each element is because of the protons, etc. present in them. In the
nucleus of each atom, positively charged protons and neutral neutrons are present.
In several orbits around these, the negatively charged electron continuously keeps
