For example, if a patient catches cold frequently, then it is imbalance in lungs, but
continuous sneezing, coughing (5, 10, 15, 20 years) is a symptom of polluted plasma.
Normally its treatment is on Rt IF P JT (plasma jt) and for specific treatment for sneezing
Rt IF 4 Spm to be done. In such matters it has been observed that only a week's treatment
has cured such chronic ailments of 20 to 30 years. The waste of blood is pitta depends
upon, the yellow colour of stool/urine. Beyond their yellow colour, if there is any change is
seen, then it is an indication of ailments created by blood. Jaundice can happen, because
of blood too. If colour of urine is white, it is also an indication of disease. If there could be
excess fire in blood, then in deficiency, it is also shown by the symptoms. Similarly from
the colour of stool, quality of blood can be measured. Besides the golden and yellow colour,
black and brown stool is a symptom of excess fire. Light yellowish stool is an indication of
deficient fire. Although, colouration of blood is due to metabolic action of Liver, so colour is
an indication of Liver/gall-bladder ailments also because ,according to Ayurveda, Liver/
gall-bladder are the paired organ of fire elements. They have an important role in blood
composition, since Liver is a chemical-laboratory where thousands of chemicals are
produced and quantity and quality of blood is dependent on them.

When ailments of gas or gastritis do not get cured by any therapy then it is said vaata
of blood (rakta-vaata). Its symptoms, the patient burps, by pressing lightly anywhere in the
body (each ailment has minimum ten causes). Excess of vaata and pitta in blood causes
a person having such type of gastric troubles, which could not be cured by any medicine.
Such types of gastric troubles are observed as cured by the treatment- Lf IF P Jt 3, 9 sed
(YBM) 0, 4 ton (WBM). Gastric trouble also causes headache and joint pain. It is surprising
that chronic diseases like, gastritis and arthritis have also been cured by treatment on
blood meridian.

In women, due to menstrual disorders, spots on the skin (which results in several
diseases) are because of imbalance in blood. In such cases, treatment should be done on
blood and plasma meridian.

In the production of plasma, the importance of quantity and quality of it has been
earlier indicated. If plasma production is inadequate in quantity and quality, then it is termed
as plasma destruction. Its symptoms are always different-The patient is lean and thin,
does very little hard work and feeling of pain in chest like someone is pressing. Such a

C33)
