(1) First- This is the uppermost layer which supports water and prevents the body

from dehydration.

(2) Second- This supports the blood; if the first layer is destroyed or removed even

then bleeding does not take place.

(3) Third- This is that part of skin, where leucoderma is created.

(4) Fourth- Here Ring worm and Leprosy takes place.

(5) Fifth- | Here Acne and Boils are produced.

(6) Sixth- In this part thick and deep rooted boils are produced.

According to ten-origin principle, it is clear that according Ayurveda, in the sequence
of elements, in Akaash metaphysical energy is minimum and physical form is very vast,
which is present in the form of skin in the body. It appears prudent to classify skin into
these six layers, but physical and metaphysical , being inseparable/indivisible , despite of
being metaphysical minimum , like the other elements, it is also similar. Hence, classification
of skin and use will also be done from time to time on the Ten-origin principle.

From treatment point of view , their minute classification, which is called Branch
Classification in Acupuncture Therapy, and their use , is not on the basis of structure of
skin , aS mention above, but on the basis of attributes and functions of element. The
uppermost layer of skin, having excessive water, after that blood, and layer below that
having excess pitta should be considered and are important at the time of treatment.

(1) Forexample, itching of skin and in secretion of serum, treatment should be small

finger of right hand on 1spm.

(2) With itching , if there is burning and bleeding —-Rt SF — 2 spm

(3) For leukoderma/white spots-Rt SF 3 spm

(4) For the disease of Leprosy- Rt SF —- 4 spm

(5) For the Pus on skin- Rt SF — 5 spm

(6) For black/red pus- Rt SF — 6 spm

Symptoms of skin degeneration- Red lips, Thighs, breasts, chest become flabby;
Flesh reducing in different part of the body. In such cases, on the basis of number of the
region, treatment should be on RH SF Spiral meridian of that region.

Diseases of defective skin :

(1) Reduction of flesh

(2) Nodes in skin

(3) Black-heads in skin

157
