moving. The electrons have very little gravity and so in the weight of an atom,
electrons weight is not counted. In the nucleus of hydrogen atom, there is only one
proton and so atomic weight of hydrogen is taken as one. !n the nucleus of each
basic element, the number of protons and neutrons present signify the atomic weight
of that element.

Atom also depicts Five Elements- Inside the atom, where protons, neutrons and
electrons are present and the electrons keep moving, that space is the akash
element. Akash is such a minute element, that we do not experience it but it is not
vacuum or zero. Subtlest matter is known as akash. In the universe, heat/light
energy is being continuously received by earth through radiation. Energy can only
flow through some medium of element. The flow of energy from the sun to us proofs
that there is no zero/vacuum between the sun and the earth. But the subtlest akash
element is present between the two.Electrons keep moving around the protons and
neutrons. The creator of mobility is the vayu element (air). The kinetic energy
transforms into heat, electricity and light due to the movement of electrons, the
potential energy present in it radiates electricity, light and heat. Its attribute also is
tejas (radiance). The number of electrons, protons and neutrons present in an atom
will indicate the extent of radiance and brilliance from that atom.

In the nucleus of atom, due to an extremely powerful force, protons and neutrons
are strongly entwined and coupled. If they are separated then infinite power will
become free and if this independent force is not properly utilised then it can be a
cause for severe destruction. The atomic power is based on this very principle.
Their separation is a cause for total destruction. The substance/energy that keeps
the proton and neutron collected together in the rlucieus and the electron within
limits is the water element. Its function is cohesion.The self-mass of protons,
electrons and neutrons is their density. This is earth element. Only those which
have density can evaporate and generate smell. A matter is recognised by its
density.The above description clarifies that each atom, irrespective of whichever
the element it belongs to, is made of five elements and apart from the Five elements
there is nothing in their units.

Indian philosophers think that in the universe every matter is made of five elements.
This is an eternal truth. There is yet another point of view about the five elements of
creation. To understand this, it is necessary to know a few principles of nature.

a) For any creation, a comparative empty(vacant) space is essential.

b) A dynamic and continuous change is life. Lack of change is death.

c) The first thing for creation is the destruction of the previous group.

d) The destructive element becomes the cause of new combination.

