Chapter - 6
Ayurvedic Acupressure Treatment Fields

1) Ayurvedic correspondence system
orerch: fF cited (afta) araesternaa: FOR, Tea: Gos Tea cites...
(Shlok-3, Pg.-897 (H))
This Human is cosmic like i.e it has similarity with the components of the cosmos. As
many are the physical components present in the cosmos, so also are in the human body;
and also as many components present in humans are also in the cosmos.

soRweRda areraaafetn:, geuraaateeran seaaktaetan:; asi ae
ofafta sary ararraRnrettarehtea:, aera Prater
agus: water: ‘Gas’ gfe ved oR: cre amet aq ee ee
Ge ta a sgerea: Bafa: ‘Gos’ sf set cAI |
(Shlok-4, Pg.-897 (H))

The visible components (organs, parts) in this cosmos are infinite. Some of them are
compared here with their physical perspectives. The six components/ tissues make this
lok/cosmos. These are 1.prithvi/earth 2.jal/water 3.tejas/fire 4.vayu/air 5.akaash/space
6.unmanifested brahma/energy. These very six components/tissues compose the human
body also .

In Ayurveda, complete similarity between cosmos (bramhaanda) and body (pinda)
has been imagined. Every component of cosmos and their function are visible in a same
manner in the human body (pinda).Great philosopher, Professor Sir Park Jae Woo of
Korea, has further promoted this concept and displayed correspondence with palms and
soles of human body. Prof. Park established, similarity of the body with palm and sole, at
physical level, i.e. externally, five parts of body (two arms, two legs, one head) are similar
to five fingers of palm and soles. Whatever is visible, or whatever is external and internal
structure of the body, is exactly in same manner, physically on the palms of hand and
soles of feet. Therefore, this Standard Correspondence system has been understood and
accepted as Physical Correspondence, established by Prof. Park.

According to Ayurveda, physical and metaphysical are inseparable. Hence, according
to this view, if the correspondence system is studied, then simultaneously with the physical
correspondence of the body, their metaphysical energy, energy-points and path
i.e.meridians will also be observed.Based on this correspondence system , in palms and
soles of the body, internal and external structure of the body is visible and with this energy
form of whole body i.e. metaphysical correspondence is also visible. Hence, from
correspondence point of view, as physical and metaphysical component of whole cosmos,
