Humours, tissues and waste are the base of this body. Base is known as root. Just
like without roots the presence of tress is impossible, similarly the absence of anyone of
humour, tissue and waste makes it impossible for the body to stay alive. Therefore, doshas,
tissue and waste are the base of the body. All activities of the body have a single purpose
which is to keep the body healthy. For this, it is necessary to maintain coordination among
all these activities. If there is imbalance in an activity, then its opposite effect is visible on
other activities of the body. The activities of the body not completed properly are named as
vyaadhi (disease). For creating this coordination, mentors make this a base named as ‘tri-
sthool’ — tripod (vaat, pitta, kapha). Vaata, pitta, kapha are the cause of the origin of the
body. Generally, the body can be divided into three parts — from head to diaphragm region,
diaphragm to navel region and navel to pelvic region and below which in sequence are the
places of kapha, pitta and vaata are similar to a house which is constructed on minimum 3
pillars. Hence, this body is known as tri-sthool. When they get imbalanced, they become
the cause of the destruction of the body. Coordination among the activities is possible only
till the time the activity area of each is different. Vaata, pitta, kapha are the creators of the
activities of the body. Although each bio-physical and bio-chemical activity occurring inside
the body is completed by them, yet there activity is different.

As the moon by creating power, sun by assimilating power and vaayu by diffusing
power adopts the world, similarly kapha by anabolic function, pitta by catabolic function
and vaata by nervous function adopts the body.

Apart from these three forces of the body, raja and tama are the forces which affect
the mind. ‘Body and mind both are the residence of the disease’ and they are also the
residence of health and happiness because their coordination is the cause of health or
happiness. As has been mentioned before, combination of body, mind and soul is life. Soul
is flawless, only the remaining two, body and mind get imbalanced. Vaata, pitta, kapha are
the cause for imbalance in the body. The causes which also affect the mind are three —
sata (divine or pure), raja (royal or materialistic) and tama (evil or dark). Attributes Sata is
pious in itself. It does not create any flaws in the mind. Only raja and tama imbalances the
mind. Divine person are flawless and only they have the exact knowledge. Salvation is not
possible for a person not having exact knowledge. This is also according to scriptures-

Tell Xoreistiad scacetdernal are wd data sea! |
(Shlok-142, Pg.-833 (H))

Definition of Moksha/salvation- When one is free from raj/luxuries and tam/darkness
and when one bears all kinds of punishments to overcome the effects of karmas, then one
is free from karmic effects and does not require to take rebirths; this is known as moksha/
salvation.
