11)

e) Specific combinations create a specific shape or size.
With the above sequence, one after another activity creates universe, otherwise
there would have been no creation. Every substance present in the universe has to
pass through this sequence. Any change in the sequence can be a cause for the
destruction of the universe. The natural sequence of creation is respectively, space
(akash/space), change/motion (vayu/air), disintegration/analysis (fire), integration/
synthesis (water) and form(earth). Like time (kaal), mind (mann), direction (disha)
and soul (atma), the aforesaid five elements are also abstract elements. By the
above mentioned sequence, the non-manifested form, takes the manifested form
and appear in the form of universe. Thus, eternal and minute powers take the form
of perishable macro-forms and create universe and the cause of this creation is the
five elements.
Ayurveda based on Tri-origin
“sgftrisear wenger |

Pree eread goo gga @ free: ||

(Shlok-24, Pg.-9 (H))

Lord Indra gave the preaching of the entire ayurvedic text to Maharishi Bharadwaj.
Ayurveda is related to both the healthy and the diseased. It is composed of the
three sutras (principles) -1.Hetu(cause) 2. Ling(symptoms) 3.Aushadh(medicines)
and is omnipresent and beneficial to all. This Ayurveda was known / visualised by
the creator Lord Brahma, himself.

The three formulae are — causes (hetu-sutra), symptom (linga) and medicines

(aushadh-gyaan). Actually, these three formulae are the soul of the entire Ayurveda.

Expansions of these formulas are found at several places in the Vedas in various

forms and their utilisation has been made for the medical literature.

A) Causes (Hetu-sutra) - It is this formula which is used to assess the origin of
the disease and its cure. For proper diagnosis of a disease, the knowledge of
the causes of its origin and the stage in which it currently exists makes it
very easy in deciding the cure. This formula has been further divided into
three sub-formulae —

i) Kaal (time)

ii) ASatmya Indriyartha Sanyog(union of senses with atma)

iii) Karma (function)

i) Kaal — Time (kaal) affects the body as its controller. It is time only that
decides childhood, adulthood and old age. Time only is responsible for
events that take place in every movement. The night and day are due to
