Seasonal changes, change of days and night, earth-quakes, cyclones etc. types of
natural activities have been seen in our body in different forms. Sudden paralytic attack,
tension in nerves, rupturing of blood vessels like unwanted situations and receiving, digestion
and excretion of food, breathing and exchange in between cells are example of natural
activities. So it is clear that, universe and body are common and due to physical and
metaphysical being inseparable, it is important to study at both levels related to these
aspects. Ayurvedic correspondence system is therefore named as main physical
correspondence i.e. physical structure of the body compared to the palms and soles, in
this metaphysical part is present in inseparable form, which we will study in the form of
meridians in next chapter.

2) Ayurvedic Meridians :

a fF ar Gee aR Marah, era aseafnreste |
arate aq oRorrarerrt engararadt waccee |
(Shlok-3, Pg.-695 (H))
All existing visible or invisible components in human body, are none other but different
types of meridians or “shrotas.” They are the means whereby all the components of human
body are created as well as degenerated. When the food is completely digested and
absorbed and all the tissues are weil formed, these are transported from one place to
another in human body via these meridians only.”
In Chinese Acupuncture the definition of meridians are written below,-
“The means where by man is created,
The means where by disease occurs,
The means where by man is cured,
The means where by disease arises;
The 12 meridians are the basis of all theory and treatment.”
In both statements, there is almost complete similarity but at the same time huge
differences can also be noted.
Difference between Chinese meridians and Ayurvedic meridians:

1) According to Chinese Concept, Meridians are responsible for the creation of the
human body, disease and their diagnosis. 12 meridians are the basis of whole
treatment of the body. According to Ayurvedic concept also these meridians are
responsible for the creation and degeneration of each component of the human

