body. These are the prenatal factor which is also certified by the Chinese concept,
but according to Ayurveda, these meridians are responsible for creation of energy
which we have after the digestion of food (which provides energy to the body in
the form of seven tissues) and circulation from one place to another place.

a raaed, aa fe waifa, aed aefa, aenaefa, aa crake, ad aeaq aa: 1
(Shlok-4, Pg.-695 (H))
Doubts about shrotaas/meridians- Most of the achaarya/visionaries believe
that human is composed of group of meridians, which are present in whole body,
which carry the useful nutrients and the doshas all over the body. But actually it is
not so. Because the human is much more different from the material of which
these shrotas are built up of; of the nutrients which they carry forward and the
wastes which they bring back.

2) According to Chinese concept, meridians are primarily in the metaphysical category
which circulates the non-manifested energy, whereas according to Ayurvedic,
meridians are presented in both forms physical and metaphysical. They are
identified by metaphysical path way and also by physical paths like, Gastro-
intestinal tract, nerve impulses, blood vessel etc.

3) In Chinese Acupuncture basis of all treatment is said to be 12 meridians whereas
according to Ayurvedic point of view meridians are infinite (like as body components
and cells). There is a meridian for each body component as for tooth, hairs, nails,
eyes and fingers. So infinite meridians are available to represent infinite components
of the body but this infinite is contracted into ten in Ayurveda for the study point of
the view having great importance. Its motto is to study each element on the basis
of ten origins. It has been elaborated in following pages.

afagad ug dfreakvewuraaad wifi, sRaswea gd |

(Shlok-5, Pg.-696 (H))
Some achaarya state that the shrotas/meridians are infinite while some others
say that they are countable.
As cosmos have infinite form, like that body have infinite form and meridians are
also like that. As infinite component of cosmos are grossly classified and has
been confined, similarly infinite meridians also has been confined according to
ten-origin principle.

172
