In above shlok synonyms of meridians are given. These are very important and make
the base of meridian vast. Meridians are physical and metaphysical both. This saying is
clarified by the above shlok. In Ayurveda different form of meridians are written below-

(1) Veins (2) Arteries
(3) Lymphatic Ducts (4) Plasma vessels
(5) Nerves (6) Means of transportation
(7) Body Holes (8) Space
(a) Uncovered (9) Residence
(b) Covered (10) Reservoir

Above synonyms of meridians clarifies that the meridians, are the important base for
each action or reaction of the body and after that for circulation of the nutrients. Because
meridians are both physical and metaphysical, some of the elements created inside the
body are visible but creation of some elements could not be visible however, the scientists
prove them and philosophers identify them by their divine vision. As GIT is the circulation
path for food, Stomach is a reservoir, Food stays here before digestion for limited period of
time and then stomach forwards food in the form of bolus. Therefore, it is a reservoir but
not residence. Like that, in which fluid circulates or moves are called as vessels.

In which blood flows with thrust are called as arteries and which have movement are
called as veins.

By which nerve impulse circulates are called as “Nerves”. Word residence is used
for them because nerve impulse and nerve fibres reside in it whereas blood does not stay
in blood vessels but keeps on moving. Scientists named digestive system as gastro
intestinal tract due to imagination of a route. In any organ or in cells space is needed
among them where fluid stays. Each cell has outer and inner space where extra-cellular
fluid and intra-cellular fluid is filled within it. Nutrients are provided inside the cell by the
medium of exchange in these fluids. So these places and space are meridians. On the
basis of these different synonyms, names of meridians have been classified. According to
Ayurvedic point of view it is clear that blood vessels, GIT are the visible meridians and
there are many such nerve fibres present which because of divided in many parts are
invisible and impulse in them is also invisible. Like this meridian of life force in which energy
circulates are also completely invisible.

174
