Description of different types of main meridians-
(1) Meridian of Life Force- The place where meridian of life force originates, is heart
which is great meridian. When it affects, the symptoms of ailments related to heart and
lungs appear. As Tachycardia, Bradycardia, Wheezing sound in chest, chest pain, disrupted
breathing etc.
weer-sirgeatads ptcrcacraet a aereerpegard {Ea WeaeraeT
waite agrerhfe freq!
(Shlok-7, Pg.-696 (H))

Symptoms of diseased PranVaah Shrota- The origin of these meridians is the heart
and the main vessel(aorta). When it gets diseased, it presents specific symptoms. Hence
this pranvaah shrotas are affected by — excess flatus, excessive obstructions, distorted,
breath upwards with slow pace-pain-sounds.

Heart circulates life force and is named as great meridian. Heart circulates pure blood
to whole body and collects impure blood in it, in this form it is a main energy meridian. In
heart for self- nutrition there are 10 coronary vessels. If the path of these vessels get
obstructed then it is a threat for life. Therefore in comparison to other meridians, heart is
called as great-root and great-meridian.

aad werong tema carom afer al worardi qeatear wlarearder erect: |
(Shlok 10, Pg.-699 (H))
Causes of diseased Pranavaah shrotas- They get diseased due to degeneration of
body tissues, holding the urine-stool urges, intake of dry food stuffs frequently, excessive
exercise and overwork done by a starving person.

(2) Meridian of Fluid- The place where this meridian originates is palate and pharynx.
When this meridian is affected the problems in tongue, palate, lips, throat and pharynx
appears. The attack of ailments on these above organs or in oral cavity is due to imbalance
state of heat. When it is not regulated then brain and body both get affected and at this
state sneezing, cold, cough, tearing eyes due to infection, sinusitis etc. are the primary
symptoms of disease which appears as a chronic disease after some times.

(Shlok, Pg.-697 (H))
Symptoms of diseased Udakvaah shrotas- The origin of these shrotas are palate

