Symptoms of diseased Rasvaahi shrotas- The origin of these shrotas is the heart
and the ten vessels. The origin of Raktavaahi shrota(Meridian of blood) is liver and spleen.
The origin of Maansvahi shrota( meridian of flesh) is muscular system and skin. The origin
of maedovaahi shrotas(adipose tissue ) is kidneys and fatty fascia. The origin of asthivaahi
shrota(bone) is adipose/flesh and jaghan. The origin of majjavaahi shrota(bone marrow) is
bones and joints. The source of shukravaahi shrota(semen) is testicles and urinary bladder.
The symptoms described above are the same weather the tissues or their shrotas/meridians
are diseased.

esicafaherertt aa way waa geafa feat afaferaardi |
(Shlok-13, Pg.-699 (H))

Causes for diseased Rasvaahi shrotas- They get diseased due to excess intake
of food stuffs which are heavy, cold in touch and effect and oily; and also due to excessive
thinking.
(5) Meridian of Blood- Disease symptoms due to disorders in blood are of imbalanced
meridian of blood-leprosy, psoriasis, heat rashes, ring worms, jaundice, leucoderma, mouth
sores, sore throat, splenomegaly, boils, blue patches, itching, urethral ulcers etc.

fearérororit Rreten safer a cepa geafa sora artaracitl |
(Shlok-14, Pg.-699 (H))
Causes of diseased Raktavaah shrotas- They get diseased due to intake of foods
and liquids which produce burning, intake of liquids-oily to touch and hot in effect, excess
exposure to sun and air etc.
(6) Meridian of Flesh- Imbalance in this meridian creates the symptoms of growth of
muscles, fibroids, allergy, goitre, black heads, mumps, etc.

aRrerdt saison went a yer al sara geafa yearn a eau earl!
(Shlok-15, Pg.-699 (H))
Causes of diseased Maansvaah shrotas- They get diseased due to intake of curd
etc, heavy sweets which take time to digest and sleeping in daytime.
(7) Meridian of Adipose Tissue- Affected meridian of adipose tissue creates the symptoms
like this- obesity, smell in body, excessive hunger and thirst, feeling of weakness, absence
of activeness, uneasy feeling due to sweating, less quantity of sperm and pain during
intercourse due to obstruction in this meridian.

sero Raraartart afrrerna! Aatardt qua arecovafetaret |

(Shlok-16, Pg.-699 (H))

178
