It means upon the destruction of the attributes of raja and tama, the person gets rid of
bonds of activities that results in rebirth, this is known as salvation.

Two types of karmas/actions — Activities done in pre-natal state are known as ‘daev
karma’ (activity by God) while the activities done in present life are known as ‘paurush
karma’ (activity by person). If the result of activities done in previous birth is left to bear,
then the person must bear its result in the fore-coming births; without this salvation is not
possible. Therefore, for salvation one must not have any results of activities from previous
birth to bear nor do any activity in the present birth whose result one has to bear, that is
attributes of raja and tama come to an end and only attributes of satva remain so that
rebirth is not required in the first place. This state is known as ‘moksha’. Until the arrival of
this state, whichever among the attributes of raja and tama is strong, will affect the mind
and cause imbalance accordingly. These imbalances are known as ‘maanas vikaar’ and
its causes —energy, sata and raja are known as ‘Maanasa dosha’.

“CRT arrat ast! aafFer:
erp saecatarrraees fern a ear aaT: | |”
(Shlok-5, Pg.-703 (H))

Raj and tam are the two mental disorders. The ailments due to them are —living in
luxuries, anger, greed, attachments, jealousy, pride, ego, mental restlessness, fear and
joy etc.

In mental ailments, firstly mind gets imbalanced and then due to its effect the body
forces become imbalanced and lastly in the body creation of ailments start. If the causes of
mental ailments get destroyed then body ailments will be destroyed on their own. Divine
quality represents the stability of mind and royal, evil or dark qualities represent the opposite
one. Balanced state denotes the natural control of body activity and imbalanced state
denotes instability in physic-bio-chemical functions of the body.

seacdtedt: gat dagftsorarerdt:| arrel araferenetehegferernfest: | |

(Shlok-58, Pg.-31 (H))

Treatment pattern of physical and mental disorders- The physical disorders are
healed by the techniques of daiv vyapashray medicines (in the realm of god) while the
mental disorders are treated by knowledge, science, patience, intellect, and meditation

etc.
