ii)

time and time only is responsible for summers, winters, rains, spring and
autumn. Its unit is from the shortest, second to the longest age.

The cause affects the function. This common formula is applicable
everywhere and in respect of time this is appropriate also. If time is helpful
in creation, then it can also be a cause for destruction. If it is balanced
then it is helpful in creation, development and maintenance of the body,
but if it is imbalanced, then it generates a disease. Even though it is an
eternal truth applicable in all origins, but our subject is based on knowledge/
science about body and life. The aim of this book is to think in respect of
health and disease of all living beings. Effort has been made to present
time as an element, an origin and an important factor for curing the diseases.
Briefly, it can be stated that time decides the result- like important functions,
hunger, thirst, old-age, defecation, urination etc. all are controlled by time.
By using time as an element and energy, curing of diseases created by
time will be an important subject in this book. Though this type of treatment
has not been found in any other treatment therapies, yet Sujok therapists
know about time acupuncture as propound by founder of Sujok, Prof. Sir
Park Jae Woo. But in the perspective of Ayurvedic knowledge, how far
time is responsible und helpful for the state of patients will be
presented in this series in new and effective ways. (Charak-2 Ayurvedic
Acupressure-based on kaal/time).

Asatmya Indriyartha sanyog (a+satatmya+indriya+arth+sanyog)- In
the fundamentals of Ayurveda, age is considered as collectiveness or
togetherness of five elements, five sense-organs, five action-organs, mind
and soul. In Ayurveda synonyms of age, have been stated as continuity,
living, holding and bondage. Based on Ayurvedic principles, the treatment
of Acupressure is extremely effective, due to its collective consideration
of the body consisting of five major elements, all sense or action organs,
mind, brain and soul. It is very necessary to understand the specific and
common knowledge of all before we are able to appreciate this concept.
Acupuncture- A Holistic treatment system

Unilateral vs. Multilateral- Most treatment therapies are unilateral in which
only one aspect is important. No collective togetherness is used in any of
them. For example, is today's most advance western treatment therapy,
a heart patient goes to a cardiologist to find why has the heart become
sick? what has increased cholesterol? who has increased blood-pressure
