i) Classification of Meridians :

The modern form of treatment therapy of acupressure/acupuncture has been presented
by Chinese scientists. It has been further developed by Korean Prof. Sir Park Jae Woo.
According to Ayurvedic scriptures, the main principles of treatment have been indicated in
the form of herbs and roots, lifestyle, proper diet, results of one’s own deeds, ailments both
normal and hereditary, their diagnosis and cure, medicines etc. Ayurvedic knowledge being
based on completely balanced theories, whole body, mind, intellect and time etc. being
based on divine philosophy, is an ocean of infinite and unlimited power. In Chinese
Acupuncture, the acu-points are situated on the body. They create a balance in every part
of the body i.e. any types of imbalance or infection is removed and that is the main purpose
of Chinese Acupuncture. Here, with the combination of the divine knowledge of Ayurveda
and treatment system of Chinese acupuncture, hundreds of our therapists in sansthan
have seen wonderful results in treatment. Based on the current system, Ayurvedic
knowledge provides the message about creation of diseases and their diagnosis in past
and in future on the basis of visualisation.

In Chinese Acupuncture, mainly 14 vertical meridians have been made the basis of
treatment and on these meridians 365 acu-points have been identified. Even though only
by these points successful treatment of various types of chronic diseases is possible, but
Prof. Park Jae Woo imagined hundreds of meridians which have proved really success‘ul.
Some Western intellectuals have also utilised Indian Yoga Philosophy’s Chakras for
Acupuncture therapy. Expansion of Chinese meridian has been assumed in the whole
body's head, trunk, both arms and legs and available acupoints on these meridian used for
treatment by applying needles or by pressing by fingers in Acupressure/Acupuncture
therapies.

Here, considering Ayurvedic meridians or the correspondence of body organs and
the Chinese and the Onnuri Sujok Correspondence principles, classification of Ayurvedic
meridians is being done. Korean, Prof. Park Jae Woo on the basis of principles of
correspondence has established meridians available on the body's palms and soles of
hands and feet as byol meridians. Again assuming just one finger for correspondence of
whole body, several types of meridians have been established on the finger. Thus, the use
of macro and micro is available in a wonderful form of treatment of body ailments.
