On the basis of above perspective, there are three types of Ayurvedic meridians in
the body-

(1) Vertical Meridian

(2) Horizontal Meridian

(3) Spiral Meridian
ii) Origin of Meridians:

According to Ayurveda, the entire cosmos/body and all its organs are elements and
that too five elements. At macro level, the universe is divided into unanimated and animated.
These are the two components of the same source. This reflects that each element is
animated and unanimated. Is it true? Purush i.e., the human body will be called as such
only when the integration of the five elements formed body i.e. , the macro body and micro
body are in complete synergy.

“Jeev/ Living being is the integration of body and soul. These are inseparable. When
separated into two, one is unanimated i.e. body and other invisible dense form of animation
(pranas).”

Hence, it is clear that the living being, in unanimated and animated form and is an
integration of macro and micro state of bodies. Inanimate form of micro body is mainly
considered as non-manifested. On this basis the Chinese philosophers considered and
imagined inanimate body as metaphysical meridians. These have been presumed as
imaginary lines through which life force or vital energy flows in all parts throughout the
body. This physical world is based on visibility and concept of invisible-metaphysical is
doubtful and not accepted by common people but each body or their minute cell and particles
are the proof of this. Mainly due to non-living, physical dominance in stone, it is called
un-animated and trees, animals and living being, are called animate. The basis of animation-
is development, growth etc. which are considered as the main symptoms. The Question
then arises- do the un-animated ones do not achieve growth, increase etc.

Animated particles of the soil, gradually becomes a compact piece of soil. Both the
soil particle and a piece of soil have mainly un-animated energy but growth and increase
indicate that they also have spirit even though it may be in a very little quantity. Hence,
dominance of inanimate is a cause of their in-animation.
