iii) Vertical Meridians :

Explanation of the imaginary lines on the map is purposeful since these meridians on
living being are the paths of energy and in themselves appear live. There use to make
human body disease free is the purpose of this chapter. The body and integration of several
body systems and for the treatment of the body it is essential to divide it into several units
like body system, organ system, tissue system, endocrine system, cell etc.

For the strong treatment of the body, an important principle is to divide the macro
body into micro and then combine the micro into a unit form. This means that a cell that has
some ailment, its diagnosis is impossible in the initial stage by any treatment therapy, this
results in the ailment increasing exponentially and in passing of time, can growin 5, 10, 15,
20, 25 years this can appear as fatal cancer and at that time the therapist is almost helpless,
since or at that level the knowledge of the disease is almost worthless. In Ayurveda to
proceed for such treatment or to treat such an ailment has not been considered necessary.
This implies that the disease which has grown into such a limit, its complete cure is
impossible, only the disease symptoms can be reduced and so many natural treatments
are available so that the bodies destructions and the family’s economic ruin can be saved.
This stand is not to be understood as to mean that treatment of serious incurable ailmenis
is not possible but what it implies is that in Ayurveda, ailments can be recognize in their
primary stage itself and then only their quick treatment is feasible. In Ayurveda several
principles have been laid down to understand diseases related to prenatal actions and of
the present births activities (like diet, thought, sleep etc. related) and these will be described
in detail in the diagnosis chapter.

From the above description, it is clear that before embarking on actual treatment, it is
very necessary for the therapist to know about the disease and then its type and the
regions it affects .From a broad view of physiology, it becomes clear to us that the production
of digestive juices are by the food we eat daily. The route of reception of food is physically
the GIT in which the movement of food is longitudinal .Hence, the power to receive energy,
postnatal is obviously related longitudinally therefore, treatment of any ailment, related to
digestive juices, should be done by vertical meridian. The main organs of the GIT are
