(1) Salient Features of Ayurvedic Acupressure

2)

3)

4)

5)

6)

Ayurvedic Acupressure is an integration of two branches - Ayurved + Acupressure.
Ayurveda is composed of two words Ayu + Veda. Ayu = Life and Veda = Knowledge.
Hence, Ayurveda = Knowledge of life. Acupressure is also derived from the two
words,Acu+ Pressure. Acu means needle and pressure means to apply force. In
China,the knowledge of energy flow in specific points of the body by applying pressure
through needle is named as Acupunture/Acupressure.

Acupuncture has been developed in different countries of the world in different manners,
and is known by those names like — Reflexology, Sujok in Korea, Electro-Acupuncture-
developed by Dr.Voll of Germany, Classical Acupuncture in China, etc.

Now in India, in Acupressure Research, Training and Treatment Centre — Allahabad,
acupressure is continuously being developed on Chinese and Ayurvedic thoughts.

Generally, China is known for Acupressure.Most of the development of acupuncture
has been done in China. Treatment in China had mainly been given by needles, however
now giving pressure on these points by applying seeds — known as seed-therapy, by
applying big or small magnets — known as magneto-therapy, by colours — known as
chromo-therapy, by electric current with the help of electric-machine — known as
electro-acupuncture. Whatever be the names, all these are the branches of
Acupuncture/Acupressure, having common principles. Treatment results are very
effective in all therapies, provided correct treatment points have been selected.

Acupuncture is generally based on the principles of five elements, six-energy, yin-
yang and physical-metaphysical. These principles have been very well described in
various books published by the centre.

Ayurvedic acupressure too, is generally based on these principles but is specifically
different and due to being based on Ayurvedic thoughts is full of infinite divine power.
This can be felt through practical only.

In Ayurvedic acupuncture, needles are not being used because of the pain in applying
them. Mainly pressure, star and byol magnets (sujok), colours and seeds are being
used. Results are not less in any way in comparison to needles.

=<B=

