12) Sequence of five elements: It is established as Akash, Vayu, Agni, Jal and Prithvi.

13)

14)

18)

16)

17)

Each element includes the nature of previous element. Like in vayu there is akash, in
Agni there is Akash and Vayu, in Jal there is Akash, Vayu and Agpri.....etc.

crarobcoge: get argtege: oR oe | Ue: Gefgorecke soarert rg eye: 11

(3.8./e1.28/4Ht 11)

Each element has its own energy. The energy of Akash is sound (shabda), Vayu is
touch (sparsh), Agni is texture (roop), Jal is taste and Prithvi is smell.

Purush or Human body is an integral part of the ten elements. Tama (origin- the creator),
Akash, Vayu, Agni, Jal, Prithvi, Time, Direction, Mind (active brain) and soul (Nucleus
of brain) together in union, contribute the human being. Nomenclature of these elements
is indicated by numbers.

Tam (Origin) - 0 Prithvi (Earth) - §
Akash (Space) - 1 Kaal (Time) - 6
Vayu (Air) - 2 Disha (Direction) - 7
Agni (Fire) - 3 Mann (Mind) - 8
Jal (Water) - 4 Atma (Soul) - 9
These elements are named as physical and metaphysical on the basis of dominance

of the element. On this basis (1) Akash, (2) Vayu, (3) Agni, (4) Jal, (5) Prithvi, are
physical and (0) Tama,(6) Time, (7) Direction, (8) Mind,(9) Soul (lightness) are in the
form of metaphysical elements used for treatment.

May it be universe or human body, both have infinite organs. It means their components
are infinite elements. These have been studied by classifying on the principle of
tulayarthata (similarity) according to origin of ten elements. For example all the gases
in environment like- nitrogen, oxygen, carbon di oxide, hydrogen, chlorine, ozone,
methane, carbon mono oxide etc. All these can be kept in the category of vayu element
commonly. These can be further classified on the basis of attributes, function,
residence, common and specific class of elements. As on the basis of vastness
nitrogen is Akash element (1), on the basis of most activeness hydrogen is Vayu
element (2) and because of being highly inflammable oxygen is Agni (Fire) element (3)
etc. Ina similar mannar, by classifying all substances into ten and its subdivisions,
the study of infinity is possible. Hence Acupressure developed on Ayurvedic concepts
in full of immense energy. It is being proved by the results of Ayurvedic Acupressure.

SSSa-_A_S=_-__2_ Se eaaSaSaSaSaSaSl_la_—_—==
