; Pees
CORTECAL -BKAEW — CERERRN CaRTEx — 4 Lowes. Heonr aL) Teme Jocczperme :

CERERELLYM — Cookdinm tes VoLuNTHty MevemenT SUCKS Pystu ee

18)
19)

20)

21)

22)

23)
24)
25)

GPtam ce, Co-oRns AT LON 2 SPEELH, MuscuLmmacti very

In comparison with Chinese Acupuncture this branch of acupuncture is multidimensional.

In this, treatment has been given on the basis of element, function, attributes, common,
specific and integration which are a wondrous speciality of this branch.

Continuous meditation, contemplation, thinking and rumination research can be
continued till birth- rebirths. Diseases related to time are controlled by this therapy.
Today’s time has been said as Kaliyuga in Vedas. This yuga is starting now. Numbers,
types and measurement of the diseases are increasing. All scientific research is going
back. Hence, their control can be possible by Ayurvedic Acupressure developed on
Ayurvedic thought full of divine power and all the thoughts can be continued in the
sequence of time.

Now a days, body is being used in the form of machine for greed, money and desire.
In the aspiration of excess production, it is being hunt for excess use. For money and
desire every-body is running. When we are conscious, it’s too late. Our life-style,
eating habits, thoughts all become un-natural, which is a continuous source of
un-healthiness.

Likewise time is an important component of universe and body, similarly nervous
system of the body is found similar to time which is an important component of the
physical body.

Likewise element direction is used in treatment on the basis of afferent and efferent
impulse of central nervous system. This is a form of example of direction. It is important
to assess the direction of vibration and mobility of each element. Direction has both
physical and metaphysical form. An addicted person with bad habits is named as
directionless or spoilt.

Similarly most active part of brain is mind- in the form of mid-brain.

In totality the smallest part of brain i.e. nucleus is indicated as soul.

So using this classification in treatment according to ten elements in the body is as
follows :

1) Akash (Space) - Lungs -  Large-intestine
2) Vayu (Air) - Heart -  Small-intestine
3) Agni (Fire) - Liver -  Gall-bladder

4) Jal (Water) - Kidney -  Urinary- bladder
5) — Prithvi (Earth) - Spleen - — Stomach

6) Kaal (Time) - Medulla - Spinal- cord

7) Disha (Direction) - Pons - Cerebellum

8) Mann (Mind) - — Mid-brain -  Limbic-system

9) Atma (Soul) -  Corticalbrain - Nucleus - Cont N OWA

Pong - Sicer] Restreet eo w[ Suartowewcf BLeooeR GorrPol | tewtenc.

EGoTLERRrom| Tas re /eyemncmat [Encr ae exPResseand
Sen Sateaw Posrure
