Their position on mega-meridians too has been established in the form of two main
parts (left and right) of the brain. Therefore, through the massage of wrists (according to the
shown direction) life force can be activated to each corner of the brain. Is it possible to
regenerate the dead cells of the brain? It needs to be answered by the innumerous patients
treated through this method.

(B-iii) 10 Subdivisions of Internal Brain Structures on Mega Meridian :

The human brain is a complicated structure. The brain which controls the entire body,
when gets diseased, a person loses control on thoughts, feelings, thinking, imaginations,
etc. and everything gets distorted. If we take a closer look at the structure of the human
brain, we will find that its external and internal built ups are entirely different. We have
already seen its external structure in the previous diagrams in the shape of a closed fist.
The internal structure is like that of a beautiful butterfly.

Main parts of internal structure of the brain (according to diagram) :

i) The upper part has left and right cerebral hemispheres.

ii) The lower part has left and right cerebellar lobes.

iii) In the middle, there is empty space in the shape of a tube. This is wide at the top
(lateral ventricles), then somewhat sac like (3° ventricle), later tube-like (cerebral
aqueduct) and lastly wide (4"" ventricle) which opens in the spine.

iv) The left and right cerebral hemispheres are joined by a horizontal strip known
as corpus callosum.

v) On each side of the 3 ventricle are bunches of nerve cells which are known
as thalamus, basal nuclei, hypothalamus, caudate & lentiform nucleus, etc.

vi) | Toconnect the various regions of cerebrum from left to right, top to bottom and

front to back, nerves of internal and external capsules are present.

vil) In between the cerebrum and cerebellum is the region of mid-brain, which is

helpful in the exchange of information.

viii) Just below this and behind the 4" ventricle is the region of pons.

ix) Below this is the triangular region of medulla where many nuclei are present.

This is the meeting point of the brain and the spine.

x) The outer surface of brain is covered by three layers— Duramater, Arachnoid

mater and Piamater.

If we see the following figure upside down, then its structure looks similar to that of a
human nose. Therefore, on the basis of the principle of tulyaarthta, when two things bear
resemblance, their level of energy is almost the same. By keeping this concept in mind,
diagnosis and treatment points on the nose were discovered.

= S___a_==

