(2) Mega Meridians

0 Introduction of Mega Meridians :

This book is dedicated towards the dual form of entire mankind of the world,male-
female, which are a wonderful creation of the God.

Man is a living being. Developed in mother’s womb, after long time of nine months,
appears on the earth as a new child in the form of a wonderful gift of the God. When, where,
how, who and in what manner will be created, all this diverts our mind towards the creator
again and again. According to Sanatana Dharma, the creator is Brahma. But in different
parts of the world, humans believe and have identified him in their different forms. Is man
competent enough to make a man like him? If yes, then that extraordinary man is nearest to
the power of Brahma. Often, we hear that some child or saint etc. has done miracles in
some part of Bharata. Somewhere the story of Gautam Buddha and somewhere that of
Jesus, having the power to stop a sea storm...we see and hear a lot of such examples.
Does man has this power? Is man an effigy made up of divine power? What is the cause of
the creation of these two forms male-female? With what motto the creator of the universe
gave us birth here, in different parts of the earth at different times? Perhaps while searching
answers for all these questions this book on Mega Meridians was created and after reading
and using it, maybe you too, could come near to the Creator. The purpose of this book is to
awaken that unlimited power hidden inside the human being which is himself unaware of.

By this therapy of Acupressure, meridians full of energy named as mega meridians
are being presented here. It seems as if we common people are still trying to understand
the importance of being male and female and that of their creation. Touching a point of this
dense energy meridian (The Mega Meridian) generates energy equal to approximately 100
acupoints. Only those will feel this energy who would want to contact with this energy
directly.So, let’s dive into the knowledge of these mega meridians.

—7 Humanisa complete creature. Enough energy and vitality is present in itself. Then,
why there is a need for two types of human i.e. male and female? We all know that the main
work of these two is to create new ones. The origin of a living being is only possible, when
the energy of the male and female of any cosmos (human, animal, bird, insect etc.) meet
together. Hence, the Creator of cosmos did not give this power to man alone. The power to
create new ones has been divided in half between male and female forms. This was about
the physical process of creating living beings. Human energy has been known in another
way - as with the meeting of Swami Vivekananda with Paramhansa, the two men who
came to know about the great powers they possessed;

SEA] EaaaaSaaa_a__—_
