as a mentor and disciple, a child and mother, a son and father, etc. They know of each
other's presence after meeting one another. A lonely man becomes capable of generating
that unlimited power in him by meditation and unlimited worship. Hence, in all these examples,
the importance of duality is clearly visible. A single person is capable of finding that energy
inside him through divine power. Keeping all this in mind, we have to move towards the
discovery of duality. In this sequence, first relation which is that of energy ~ is living being
(saguna) and of their creator Brahma (aguna). In Ayurvedic acupressure, it has been tried
to present in the form of relation between soul and God. In this series, by studying of human
power or energies of human body, two bipolar form of energies present inside them can be
clearly seen. As importance of duality in the structure of man.

1. Two eyes 11. Two breasts

2. Twonostrils 12. Twolungs ro

3 Two cheeks 13. Two bones of scapula

4. Two ears 14. Two parts of trunk —chest, abdomen
5. Two lips 15. Two kidneys

6. Two eyelids of an eye 16. Twointestines (small and large)

7. Two jaws 17. Twoholes (urinary hole, anal hole)
8. Two shoulders 18. Twohip bones

9. Two hands 19. Twolegs

10. | Twothumbs 20. Twoknees, two patella, etc.

If we look in this way, in man himself specific level of energy of duality is present. The
two main parts of human body — body and mind, too, have been placed in two specific
categories. Similarly, dual form of soul and spirit are being tried to be established in these
too mega-meridians. So let us see the actual shape, size and form of these mega-meridians.
It is shown in the figure given below —

Our hands are mostly used in daily work. This can be understood in this way: as the use
or work of a part is greater, so is the energy residing in it. Because the capacity to do work is
nothing but energy, therefore, on the basis of dense energies of the wrist joints of both hands,
anew meridian was discovered by joining the acupoints present here. This was first observed
by the Research Wing at Allahabad even though Prof. Park Jae Woo of Korea has been its
source of inspiration. Ten specific points were located on it while mentioning the importance
of wrist joints. It was also clarified that the energy present in all the fingers are received by the
wrists. As if all the fingers together originated from the wrist joint.

———_—_ = 2

