(D) Blood Vessels of the Body on Mega Meridians :

Human body has different energy sources. Energy in different forms vitalise the body.
Nerves, blood vessels, muscles, organs, etc. all are forms of energy. Blood is a special
form of energy. There are two types of blood in the body — pure blood and impure blood.
Pure blood has more oxygen while impure blood has more carbon dioxide. The task of
providing energy of blood to different parts of the body is mainly done by the heart. It works
like a pump. Two types of blood vessels are joined to it. These are known as arteries and
veins. Pure blood of the whole body (which is created by the digestive system) is stored in
the heart. From here, oxygenated blood through the arteries provides nutrients to each cell
of the body. The deoxygenated blood of the body is brought into the right region of the heart
through the veins. In this way, the Creator of the universe has established various physical
systems of Yin-Yang and Homo-Hetero in the human body.

Heart is the most beautiful organ of the human body. Its structure, from its formation till
its completion, remains the same, like a spiral. Therefore, it keeps its basic shape and structure.
The heart beautifully manages to keep both types of blood (pure and impure) within its different
chambers. This nutrient ‘blood’, with the help of arteries and veins reach every corner of the
body and provides it a special glow. Due to clotting of blood or increase or decrease in its
speed of flowing, symptoms of colour change, itching, inflammation, etc. appear in the related
region. Therefore, with the study of blood carrying vessels, arteries,successful treatment of
blood circulation related problems of various parts of the body is possible.

Circulatory system of the body has been studied in the following four ways, from the
viewpoint of mega-meridians :

(i) 10 arteries of the upper part of the body
(ii) 10 arteries of the lower part of the body
(iii) 10 veins of the upper part of the body
(iv) 10 veins of the lower part of the body
(i) 10 arteries of the upper part of the body :

Arteries carry the pure blood from the heart to the whole body. The arteries of the upper
part of the body have been shown in the diagram. Of these, two are of utmost importance.
The main artery carrying blood from the heart to the body is aorta. Pure blood reaches the
heart from the lungs, through pulmonary veins. This pure blood from the lungs through the
pulmonary veins reaches the left part of the heart and from their through the aorta moves out
of the heart and into the whole body. These pulmonary veins are the only veins in the whole
body which carry the pure blood. In this way, they has been given the energy number ‘0’. With
the help of figure, arteries above the aorta have been shown. The number allotted to arteries
of upper right part is 1, 4, 5, 8 (homo) and that allotted to arteries of left part is 2, 3, 6, 7
(hetero). The Aorta supplying the whole body has been allotted the number ‘9’.
