(E) Bones of Body on Mega Meridian :

The innermost part of the human body is known as skeleton. These bones provide a
stable structure to the body. Bone is a connective tissue. Different muscles and tendons of
the body connect with it. By the study of the structure of bones, substances present in it are
found to be 25% water, 25% bone cells and 50% calcium phosphate (CaPO 4): Bones are
generally considered stable, but these are nourished by blood vessels and changeable.

Its different forms are visible in the human body. In this part, study of bones is being
presented in the following categories —

(i) Ten main bones of body
(i) | Tenmain bones of the upper part of the body
(iii) | Ten main bones of the lower part of the body
(iv) _ Division of all bones of the body in three regions —
a) — Tenbones of head and neck
b) — Tenbones of chest and arms
c) | Tenbones of abdomen and legs
(v) Division of vertebral column in 3 categories of 10 (plotted on RMM)

By the different types of above mentioned studies, discussions have been done on
some new dimensions of mega meridians.

(i) Ten Main Bones of Body :

Try to concentrate on the diagram of skeleton of human body. In this diagram, ten
main bones of human body can be seen clearly. The basis of their classification is
their size and location. The main base of skeleton of the body is the skull and spine.
Therefore, they have been related with number ‘0’ and ‘9’. After that, look at the two
scapula bones of the upper part. They appear to be connected with the shoulders and
collar bone, but due to their being most free and in the shape of a butterfly, they have
been related with ‘Akash’ and ‘Vayu’ (1, 2) energies. In middle, sternum bone has
been allotted the energy number ‘3’. ‘3’ number is related with fire and element fire is
naturally placed in the middle and it is the basis of all functions/structures. Collar bone
(clavicle) is related to energy number ‘4’. This thin, weak bone shows combination
(sanyoga). A solid structure of bones, rib cage, shows the energy number ‘5’ (Earth).
Below it the, pelvic bone is allotted energy number ‘6’. Due to direction being the
controller of speed, the bones of legs ‘7’, and maximum activity being in hands, bones
of hands have been allotted the number ‘8’.
