(6) Three Dimensional Form of Mega Meridian

Detailed information about the Mega Meridians has been illustrated earlier. By learning
about these different dimensions, we clearly recognize the importance of our two wrists.
Twisting of the wrists alone sets these two sources of energy to work. They only needa
signal and momentum. They are working independently, to deliver the energy flow to the
extreme regions of the body. By activating them through Touch, Massage, Colour, Seeds
or Magnets, they cure the diseases with great speed. The special energy of the MM can
rejuvenate even the regions affected by the worst of the diseases. However the energy
contained by these meridians too has some limitations. Therefore these mega meridians
prove to be the best medicine, to keep the network of the physical energy healthy throughout
from birth till death. The energy flow contained in them and the mysterious power of the
Points is enough to remove all the toxins. Even when the dense energies of these wondertul
energy sources were distributed on the 30 joints of the hands, the results obtained were
astonishing. Hence again and again they show us that the Heavenly Energy related to the
divine power exists within us.

The dense energy of the Mega Meridians is distributed, in small parts, on the finger
joints. On these, the different three dimensional forms of the body were established. Here,
three of the main body fluids have been discussed.

Plotted on the 30 subdivisions of MM are :

(i) Organs — Senses — Endocrines

(ii) Digestive — Circulatory System — Endocrine System

(ii) | Plasma -Blood—Hormones
i) Organs —Senses-—Endocrines:

On studying the physical structures under different stages, various dimensions are

discovered. The different Organs in the body are arranged according to the Five-

Element Principle. Therefore a total of 10 organs work together, to run properly the

structural and functional systems of the body. In the 30 subdivisions of MM, the first

10 Organs are plotted on the first 10 joints. The Yin dominant Organs are plotted first

and the Yang dominant Organs afterwards. During physical growth the external

structures (arms and limbs) and the internal structures (Organs) are formed according
to a sequential pattern. Broadly, as shown in the figure below, the different components
of the body can be divided into three main parts:
