According to the above categorization, the Organs (from mouth to Anus) taking part in
Digestive System are written in a sequential order. Primarily it is through the Yang organs,
that the food disintegrates into fragments and gets digested to help in the production of
blood. Therefore, the organs that maintain the harmony of the blood (Lungs, Heart, kidneys,
Pancreas and Spleen) are kept on the 10 middle joints. In case of blood related diseases,
treatment given on the three joints of both small fingers, by applying 5-5 star magnet (even
on the phalanges) is very effective in weakness, fatigue, lethargy etc. By this, treatment of
shape-size of glands is more effective than the treatment of hormones related problems.

iii) Plasma—Blood—Hormone:

Human body is made up of various substances. Energy is present in its every particle.
This energy is responsible for the working of the various components of the body. Out
of these substances there are three most important substances — Plasma, blood and
hormones. Plasma is the first stage of Blood. After the digestion of food, the nutrients
are absorbed by the small intestine. The fluid thus absorbed is rich in nutrients and is
called Plasma. When blood cells get added to the plasma, it becomes Blood. Therefore
for the treatment of position, production and distribution of the nutrients in the body, the
10 substances of Plasma are established on the first 10 sub-divisions of MM. This is
based on the principles of Anatomy and Physiology. Detailed description of the various
components of Plasma and their functions is given in the following pages.

Blood is the second most important substance in the body. Its main function is to
maintain balance between the body and the surrounding environment. Blood also helps
in maintaining between the different cells in the body. Itis always moving and maintains
the general environment of the body. The ten forms of the various constituents of
blood are established on the middle ten sub-divisions of MM.

Hormones directly affect the metabolism of the various cells of the body. They are
also called Chemical Messenger. Along with the Organs it also includes some endocrine
glands like Thyroid, Pancreas, Pituitary glands etc. Each gland secretes some
hormones. Each hormone has its own defined function and affect. The working of a
group of hormones secreted by a gland is studied and according to their energy and
number they are established at the last 10 subdivisions of MM.
Plasma-Blood-Hormones are discussed (based upon the books on Anatomy and
Physiology) in detail in the following pages.
