In the above table, division of whole body on the basis of duality is indicated and
marvellous results are obtained only by twenty points placed on Mega Meridian. As-blockage
in arteries of the whole body or for any other type of treatment of the ten arteries above the
diaphragm.the 10 points of LMM and of the ten arteries below the diaphragm, the 10 points
of RMM can be treated, generally or specifically. Here, it means that the division of each
branch point further into ten branch points on the related region in the form of chakra, the
source of energy leads to 200 points on Mega Meridian. Hence, mega-meridians are lebelled
as the seas of energy and each type of meridian gets incorporated in it just as all the rivers
get into the sea and importance of seas in the formation of atmosphere is known to all.
Similarly, each point of mega meridian is helpful in homeostasis of the internal atmosphere
of the body. Energy is also required for the circulation of energy which is obtained from the
daily intake of food. It means that energy is invisible but its nourishment is based on food
(visible). Generally, scientists believe that blood cells and nerve impulses are the carriers
of energy. Each cell of the body gets nourishment and energy through them. In Ayurveda,
energy or vitality is named as the soul element. This vitality or soul requires food. This point
can be disputable but it is not entirely meaningless.-Is a man's life possible without food? If
itis, then for how long, thatis, itis only possible for some time. This has been discussed
with many experts but none have been able to take a clear stand. The objective of this book
is not to give rise to controversy but to recognise the unlimited energy and the protection of
living being with its use. A little success has been observed in this objective. The rest lies
within the future.

Once again, elaborating the principle of duality — pair of two the big joints, that is, as is
the importance of wrists in hands, same is that of ankles in case of legs. On the basis of
both these pairs, four mega meridians are the basis of treatment in this book. Among these,
importance has being given to the mega meridians of wrist joints. The elaboration of both
mega meridians of legs is possible in the future. In this way, as many points are on the
mega meridians of hands, so many are on the mega meridians of legs, that is, there are 800
treatment points on 4 mega meridians.

Again, according to the principle of acupuncture, mega meridians of wrists have been
divided at a micro level in the form of two meridians (RMM, LMM) and 10 points have been
shown in each. Their nomenclature and position of points on them have been given at the
micro division of brain in the following pages.

By the different forms of above pairs, knowledge can be gained about the region of the
mega meridians. By gently massaging both the wrists, it appears to be the easiest way of
balancing the circulation of energy at many levels. Location of ten points on wrist region is
shown in the figure below. By applying gram or pea seeds on it, energy on the affected
mega meridians can be balanced.

SSS SSS SSS

