Marvellous forms of the Mega Meridians are presented here. The two wrists of the
human body, is the source of infinite energy. The energy contained in them is also multi-
dimensional. Treatment of the 10 different substances of the body (bones, blood vessels,
nerves etc.), using the 10 Points of MM is also mentioned here in a simple way. The
importance of 10 was clarified by ‘Ten Origin Principle of Ayurveda’ and the same set of
events mark the birth of Mega Meridians.

This book discusses in detail the energy sources of the mega meridians, their
introduction and forms in an orderly fashion. The Acu points situated on these, their effective
regions, when, where and how to use these points have been given proper attention. Different
dimensions have been illustrated on the relation of MM with each component of the body.
Treatment of all the Chinese meridians and Tissue meridians by single MM point; treatment
of different subparts of Brain by MM; 10 main nerves of hand and legs on MM; treatment of
veins and arteries by MM Points; treatment of 10 main bones as well as the 30 vertebrae of
spinal column are all presented here.

Mega Meridians are situated at the wrist joints but their tiny dimensions are scattered
on the finger joints. These 30 subdivisions of MM along with the 30 joints on finger presents
the three dimensional form(10-10-10) of MM. Therefore in the category of body substances
body organs, senses and endocrine glands are divided in the form of 30. Likewise the three
main body systems Digestive, Circulatory and Endocrine is presented in the 30 subdivisions
of MM. Among body fluids Blood, Plasma and hormones are found similar to the 3 dimension
form. In this way different uses of the Mega Meridians are known.

Some new dimensions of MM were presented under the heading ‘Specific’, in the
middle pages of the book. The main of these are — Branch treatment on MM; Branch order
of Points on MM for veins; Homo MM and Hetero MM; three dimensions of MM(30
subdivisions). With these general and specific lines, an attempt has been made to present
some energy forms of the MM. The Mega Meridians on the two wrists of Human Body, filled
with divine power, is a boon for the medical world in curing the patients. Just the touch of
these is capable of curing the physical and mental diseases. We hope that the readers
shall use these for the health and benefits of others as well as themselves.

Me Me aM
ye eo age
