(33) Sciatica and Spinal Disorders — Sciatica generally is of 10 types, as itis made clear
by the ten divisions of the sciatica nerve branches. Which branch is affected, can be
diagnosed through Toe Touch Diagnosis (TTD) by applying slight pressure and
according to the related Toe No. the treatment is given by applying Chakra Magnet or
5-Star Magnet. If more than one Toe is found to be affected, find the Inference using
Chakra Magnet and based on that the different points on the RMM should be sedated/
toned, with Chakra Magnet. Since various nerves connect the Spinal Cord to the
different Organs in chest and abdomen, this treatment cures not only sciatica but also
the various parts of spine and the attached Organs simultaneously.

The treatment will reduce the pain as well as cure the functioning and structure of the
Organs. A couple of days are enough in case of acute diseases. If it is an old disease
oris due to Appendicitis, Fatty Liver, blockage of Artery, Prostate enlargement, Fibroid
in uterus then the treatment should be given for a longer period of time.

In case of structural fault in the vertebrae of spinal cord also the treatment should be
given for longer period of time. Slip Disc can also happen due to the above causes
therefore the treatment should be given for longer time in slip disc too.

Hence, diseases of the spinal cord should be treated in the following way.

i) On affected Toe apply Methi at Pitta Joint (Middle joint) or on Toe *%* NCH
(Branch) Treatment

ii) According to the affected Toe number, by increasing or decreasing the energy
of one or more points on RMM using Star magnet or Chakra Magnet

iii) | Onthe different points of RMM, by giving Branch treatment. For this the treatment
should be given after diagnosing according to the various Tables.

For example, from the Diagnostic Tables it is clear that for Cervical :
C1, C2, C3 - treatment is given on RMM *x 9 (Branch)
C4, C5, C6 — treatment is given on RMM % 8 (Branch)
C7, T1, T2 — treatment is given on RMM *% 7 (Branch)
Similarly for sacral region treatment is given on RMM ¥ 1 (Branch).
For Lumbar, treatment is given on RMM % 2 (Branch).

For Thoracic, treatment should be given on RMM % 3, 4, 5, 6, (Branch).

127

