Mega Meridians of Legs

Universe is a store of infinite energy. Each particle of the universe is similar to it. The
most important particle of the universe is the Human Body. Therefore the human body itself
is an infinite store of energy. The difference is merely the size of it. The universe is a huge
storage of energy while the human body is a tiny unit of it. Similarly in scope of human body,
Head and Trunk resembles the principle of huge and tiny respectively. Brain contained in
head is the controller of the organs like heart, lungs, stomach, kidney, spleen, intestines,
urinary bladder, liver etc., contained in the trunk. The different operations of these organs
are controlled by the impulses send by the brain. These impulses are nothing but energy.
There is hardly any object existing in Nature, which does not possess energy. The difference
is merely the quantity — less or more. However here it would be reasonable to limit our
analysis to the human body and elaborate this theory. We believe that there is God in every
particle, scientifically every particle occupies a given space and cannot exist without vibration.
This vibration is an indicator of manifestation of energy and the amount and the type of
energy differentiates each particle from other to be vessel of lesser or greater energy. More
and more energy, more and more dynamism and motion and more and more animations
and contrary to it—a particle is known to be unanimated (non-living). This clarifies that, the
shape and size of any object depends upon the amount of energy contained in it. In case of
Macro (Big) — Physical objects, as the energy level is low the size is bigger while in case of
micro (Small) — physical objects the size is very small due to dense energy level. This
means the amount of energy (vitality) is more in smaller objects than in bigger size objects.
For example a water melon is bigger in size than an apple, but the amount of vitality (as per
experts) is more in apple than in water melon. The transition from gross (macro) to subtle
(micro) and vice versa is universally conspicuous. Water (micro form) freezes to form
huge icebergs (macro form) which melts to form water again, is an example of the same
phenomena. This means that the transition from gross (macro) to subtle (micro) and from
subtle to gross are two faces of the same phenomenon. Philosophers might have put forward
in many ways but the Ramcharitmanas explains it as below:

‘A WA Ay sel WHT, Hee seer seue sea

Which means, "Aguna (Micro) as well as Saguna (Macro) are two forms of the same
Brahma (the Creator)." The icebergs and the water, both are the two forms of the same
fluid. The formless (micro) is called Meta-physical whereas the formfull is called Physical.
Both are inseparable. Ayurveda defines the merger of the Meta-physical (the Soul) with the
Physical (the Body) as the Living Being (Jeev). This principle is the primary foundation of
the development of Chinese Acupuncture. Being guided by the Universal Law the treatment
performed under this method is proving to be extremely strong.

