(4) Regions of Impact of Mega Meridians

On both the wrists, two components of the body are plotted. The basis of this is taken
from the similarity principle. Each object or energy-source, which is present in pairs, the
level of dual energy will be similar. As, when two persons meet, then this pair is named
as- friends, brother- sister, husband- wife etc. In all these relations, there is an importance
of two. So, various dimensions of the energy have been presented in ten steps by Ayurvedic
Acupressure. Ten forms of the manifestations of energy have been told as from
0, 1, 2, 3...till 9. Among these, the energy of the 2nd place shows specific importance.
When dual energy is distussed,two specific energies are said to be complementary to
each other such as- Yin-Yang, Homo-Hetero etc. Separately, they have their own importance
and presence but when combined, their energy increases manifold. Commonly, we say it
as 1 and 1 is 11 (eleven) whereas in reality their presence is based on duality. This can be
understood by some other types of examples as well :

° If we have only one eye, then we'll be able to see but range of visibility would be
less. Likewise, if one eye among the two is affected, then the second healthy
eye would start to get stressed.

. Ifa person has only one kidney or an undeveloped kidney since birth, then too
we can feel the imbalance of dual energies.

e A person standing on one leg, who's other leg is cut or has polio, also tells us
the importance of duality.

By many examples of such types, we can understand the diseases and human relations
and different dimensions of cosmos on the basis of dual energy level. The different units
found in pairs have their own specific importance. Not anyone becomes brother, sister or
friend to someone. On the basis of characteristics and level of energy of a person, creator
of the universe related us with most specific energies of brother-sister, father-mother and
other. relatives. Keeping in mind that specific dual energy makes marriage or gives birth in
the form of child by a specific mother having specific energy. Did we think about this? What
is the kind of relation between man or any other organ (liver, etc.) and what is the level of
their importance? Before discussing these topics, by bringing attention towards oldest and
most basic five-element principle of acupressure, let us see the relation of mega meridians
with different organs.

Each organ is made up of some specific tissues. In our body, liver, kidney, heart, etc.
performs different types of functions, so their energy is also of different levels. According to
five-element, five yin organs working continuously and five yang organs working time to
time have been told. In five elements, by looking at the element and energy specifically or

0

