vil) Excessive joy makes the pulse slow and slightly hollow or overflowing on the

heart position.

viii) Fear and shock makes the pulse rapid.

ix)

Guilt also makes the pulse rapid and shaking.

Tongue :

i)

ii)

i

iv)

vi)

Red tip of tongue is a sure sign of emotional and mental problems. The tip of
tongue corresponds to heart. It is affected by all emotions. All the emotions cause
stagnation of Qi after some time. Stagnation of Qi produces fire. Hence, all
emotions lead to fire. Hence the tip of the tongue becomes red.

If a larger area in the front part of the tongue is red, it indicates lungs heat.

Grossly abnormal shape of the tongue indicates manic depression or psychosis.

Shock or traumatic child birth can also produce such tongue shape. The person

is very sad. Even if they experience happiness, it lasts only a few minutes.

Ifsuch a tongue is there alongwith very dull eyes, this is a very bad sign indicating

severe mental illness.

Anger makes the sides of the tongue red indicating liver fire rising or liver yang

rising.

If both sides of the tongue are red it usually indicates severe emotional problems

due to anger and frustration affecting both liver and heart.

Acombined stomach and heart crack with yellow coating inside the crack indicates

that the fire and phlegm have obstructed the stomach and heart misting the mind.

Such tongue is found in manic depression.

Amidline crack going up to the tip of the tongue indicates that the heart is affected.

The meaning depends on other findings given below :

a) Ifthe tongue colour is normal and the midline crack going upto tip is not too
deep, it indicates the constitutional weakness of the heart. There may not
be any heart problem. Such person may develop emotional mental problems,
if subjected to emotional stress in life. Such person will be less resistant to
emotional stress.

b) Amidline crack going up to the tip of the tongue and the tip of the tongue is
ted it indicates that the person has already developed some emotional
problem.

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture- - Part 21

