10)

11)

12)

‘wore
Eyes
reer

i) Cones are responsible for sharp vision & colour vision. These cones are
clustered mainly in the macula.

ii) The rods are responsible for night & perpherial vision (ufa vd ofa afte).
Rods are more numerous than cones. The rods are much more sensitive to
light. But they do not register colour. Rods are grouped mainly in the peripheral
areas of the retina. Rods do not contribute to visual clarity as the cones do.

When the rods & cones encounter light, a chemical reaction takes place that
generates electrical impulses. These impulses travel from the retina via optic
nerve to the visual cortex.

The chemical involved in the chemical reaction is called retinol, which is made
from vitamin A.

Hence, a deficiency of vitamin A can cause night blindness.
Dysfunction of cones causes colour blindness.
Macula or yellow spot ‘tat fry :
The most important part of the retina is a small area called the macula.
There are millions of tightly packed photoreceptors in the macula.
The high density of photoreceptors in the macula makes the visual image sharp.
Choroid <fia vert :
The choroid is a layer of blood vessels (<earfefrat &t axa) that underlies the retina.
afenea (retina) & Ara xemarfetat at axa ach fare <Bra geet aT choroid Het ZI

Itis a thin vascular membrane of dark brown or chocolate colour. It consists of arteries
& veins. In between the arteries and the veins there are dark star shaped pigment
cells. The function of the choroid is to nourish the retina.

Optic nerve @f& fier :

Each photoreceptor is linked to a nerve fibre.

The nerve fibres from the photoreceptors are bundled together to form the optic nerve.
The optic disk, the first part of the optic nerve, is at the back of the eye.

The photoreceptors in the retina convert the image into electrical impulses.

The electrical impulses are carried to the brain by the optic nerve.

The optic nerve connects the retina to the brain.

C

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture- - Part-14 - Treatment of Eye Diseases

