Chapter 1

Acupressure—an introduction

Acupressure is an ancient Indian system of medicine whose fundamental
principles can easily be traced in Ancient Indian Texts, Ayurved and other
natural healing methods. The origin of this Self Healing Therapy lies in the
natural acts of human when they relieve these pains by pressing on the pain-
ful areas of body thereby getting relief. If a person has pain on head or legs,
one presses on the effected part and gets relief. This natural act of healing
has been studied in detail and on further analysis has given birth to this
simple method of treatment in which various points on the body are pressed
to balance the energies, thereby treating various diseases. Have you ever
thought of what the animals in the jungles do when they get sick? Probably
we see that the animals rub their bodies on the walls or tree trunks wiz"
77) some other rol! on the ground for rubbing themselves. Practically they are
pressing and rubbing the points on their bodies trying to keep themselves fit.
a This unique and wonderful method of treatment available in the body itself
has been given a scientific basis by the knowledgeable persons and they
& have placed before other methods of treatment. Continuous thought pro-
we cess and the research in the field has made successful the treatment of mul-
tiple common ailments as well as chronic diseases like cancer etc. by this
acupressure system.
ee. ys Acupressure is a word composed of - Acu + pressure. Acu means needle
ye and pressure means to apply force. Thus, to press a point which is as small as
aneedle tip and thereby treat a disease is known as acupressure. Pressure on
AY such small and subtle points can be applied by seeds, needle, pointed instru-
wr ¥en magnet etc. These modes of treatment provide the various names to
this therapy. When we press a treatment point by a blunt object it is called
Acupressure. Similarly, many parallels are there with this therapy. Nomencla-
tures like Acupressure/Acupuncture, Magnet therapy, Seed therapy, Colour
therapy etc. are the various modes of treatment, all of which have the com-
mon fundamentals.
In the whole body or on its corresponding zones, specific points are selected,
pressed or applied seeds or needles, or colours, or magnets to create an electro
magnetic field in the organ or related body parts, which is known as bio energy.
This bio energy (Cheina) is the fundamental basis of life or we can say the human
body remains healthy or ill, this depends on this bio energy. The balance of this
very bio energy is the aim of acupressure therapy.

t)
