Chapter 7
Body management

Our body is made up of the smallest living unit cell. These cells are in infinite numbers ine
©=aluman body, which'can only be seen by refined microscopes. These cells have the capacity to .
reproduce and grow. It is a unique phenomenon that the human body is created by the unique
combination of two cells only i.e. ova and sperm but until there is any expression or effect of
that divinity, any creation cannot proceed.

Structure of a cell- Every
cell is made up of a jelly like
substance called cytoplasm. In
the center of the cytoplasm is
a nucleus. Around the cell,
there is a thin covering called
the cell membrane. The
nucleus is an important part of
a cell which controls its struc-

ture, reproduction power and nae
other activities. In this nucleus | Diaphragm Heart
are the genes which are made Liver ~ Stomach
up of DNA. These genes are | Gat Bladder Bee Spleen
the carrier of hereditary traits Kidney iaihias
from one generation to the Large h ca
other. Through these genes intestine ry intestine
only, one cell reproduces into Urinary
other cells, These cells during Bladder

the stages of growth, get de-
stroyed and instead new cells
are continuously formed. Simi-
lar kinds of multiple cells join
to form a tissue.

Structure of a tissue- In the human body, there are different kind of cells for different
kinds of activities. A group of similar kind of cells is called a tissue.

Similar kinds of tissues unite of form specific organs of the body for example, in the forma-
tion of brain, nerve cells are utilized. These cells first make a tissue which later on form the
brain and nervous system. Similarly the muscular tissue form the muscles of the body.
According to their structures, tissues are of different types for example the connective
tissue which joins the different parts of the body, the bone tissue which forms the bone,
epithelial tissue forms the upper layers of the skin and different parts. Many tissues com-
bine to form the organs and body systems from which the whole physical body is created.

[31]
