a Grpeicny Spink 7

Sos} yy

Different parts of the body- On broad level we can divide the human body into 3
Pparts-

a. Head

b. Trunk

c. Limbs

The upper part of head is skull in which the brain resides. The trunk is divided into 2 parts
by a curtain of muscles. This is called diaphragm or mediastinum. Diaphragm helps in the
respiration process to inhale and exhale the air.

X)

The upper part of diaphragm is called chest. In the chest there are two main organs Heart
& Lungs.

In the center lies the heart from which the main artery and other blood vessels arise. The
left lower part of heart lies lightly towards the left. In this part is the left ventricle. It circu-
lates blood in the whole body. We feel the heart beat on the left side in this region. Both the
sides of the heart are the left and right lungs. Above and central to them is the air-tube.
Behind the air-tube is the food pipe.

Below the diaphragm is the stomach. Right side of the stomach and just below the dia-
phragm is the Liver. Attached to the liver on the inner side is the gall bladder and on left
back side of stomach lies the spleen. Below the stomach, pancreas gland is attached which
lies in a diagonal position. Behind these organs, are the left and right kidneys. From each
kidney a tube called ureter opens into the urinary bladder. From the right lower side of
stomach, the large intestine arises. It encircles the small intestine. The length of small
intestine is approximately 6 meters. In the abdomen it lies in a coiled form. At its lower end
is the rectum of large intestine. This large intestine is approximately one and a half meter
long.

On the back side of neck and trunk is the vertebral column (spine) which is made up of
vertebra. In the neck there are 7 vertebra, in chest 12 vertebra and in the lower are 5
vertebra. Below them at the back of the anal canal are a group of 5 vertebra called sacrum.
Below the sacrum are small triangular vertebra which from the last part of the spine. Inside
each vertebra is an oval shaped cavity. From inside this a rope like spinal cord emerges
from the brain and goes to the bottom of the spine. From both the sides of the spinal cord
arises millions of nerves which reaches to different parts of the body.

On the upper part of the trunk the two arms are attached and from the lower part the two
legs are joined.

The whole body is covered by the skin. Below the skin there is a layer of fat or flesh. Below
this is a 3" layer of fibrous tissue. It hides the muscles and blood vessels of the body.

132]
