LTE Ga mew7s — Touke , FLEXTALE FIBRouw ConnetrvE
Tissues

ho Bones oR Heros 7oKETHER

In between the muscles are the red and blue blood vessels. The blue vessels takes the blood JOipv Is

towards the heart and are called veins. The blood to the various parts of the body- is

carried by red vessels called arteries. They carry oxygenated blood. The vessels which
carry blood towards heart are called veins and they have deoxygenated blood.

WHICH Connects T

Near by the muscles are white thin thread like structures called nerves. These nerves carry
impulses of touch, pain etc. to the brain while some nerves produce contraction according
to the message received by brain and spinal cord. For example if hand comes in contact
with a hot object, the sense of heat and burning is known by the nerves and then the
orders to remove the hand from the hot object comes from the brain and spinal cord and
thereby the hand is removed.

The bones lie in the deepest parts of the body. Inside them is a hollow space in which
sponge like material is filled called bone marrow where the blood is formed.

Two or three bones and muscles, ligaments join to form body joints for example elbow
joint, knee joint etc.

The human body is made up of different body systems. Each of them and its parts have a
specific function. The human is ignorant of its activity but they are continued whole life.
On observing these activities and arrangements of the body we are often surprised for
example the heart made up of 350 gms. muscles, circulates 5.5 Its. of blood in the whole
body in one minute only, In 24 hours it pumps about 2000 Its of blood. Similarly both the
kidneys of 300 gms, filter about 1700 Its of blood in one day and prepares one liter of
urine. The human body is filled up of many such amazing facts.

When many parts of the body join together to perform a specific work it is called a system. ,

For example the mouth, salivary glands, stomach, intestine, pancreas and liver etc to-
gether perform the work of digestion hence they come under the digestive system. Simi-
larly the heart and the blood vessels together form the circulatory system. The description
of various body systems is given below:

1. Circulatory system -

As described above this system is made of heart and blood vessels. The blood vessels are
spread in the whole body. If we measure the length of these vessels, it will be many thou-
sands of kilometers.

The heart is made up of special muscles and divided by a curtain into left and right cham-
bers. These left and right chambers have no connection with each other. But both these
parts are divided into upper and lower chambers by valves which open on one side. From
these the blood can go to other chambers but not returns back. (in such a manner the

[33]

