Fueces - WASTE MATTER DESCRARAGO FROM EWTEs TING,

qlas

children, this activity is very fast. An infant breathes 40 times in a minute. The breathing rate
also increases while running, doing work and other activities because at this time the body
needs excess oxygen and the breathing rate is increased thereby. The breathing process also
maintains the body temperature.

3. Excretory systems-

The various metabolic activities in the body pro-
duce multiple toxic elements. They are to be re-
moved from the body. This work is done by various
body organs like kidneys, lungs, skin, liver and large
intestine.

Both the kidneys in the body remove the harmful
urea and uric acid from the blood into the urine.
Excess water and some salts like potassium etc. are Main Vein
also removed from the body. Skin also removes
some harmful substances and salt, water through
sweating. The liver releases some excretory sub-
stances through bile into the intestine. The large in-
testine removes this waste material in the form of
faeces out of the body.

As discussed above the lungs also release carbon
dioxide and some harmful substances like alcohol,
ammonia etc. through exhalation. In this manner
by the help of various organs the harmful substances x Urinary hole
are excreted from the body.

= Excretory systems
4. Digestive system- Git Gashyo Toh Gl yed Track

In the digestive system are mouth, salivary glands, food pipe, stomach, duodenum, pan-
creas, gall bladder, liver, small intestine and large intestine.

Digestive system digests the food substances into the form that the body can use it for energy
and growth.

When a food item is chewed by the teeth then the saliva is mixed by the nearby salivary
gland. Saliva is an alkaline fluid which helps in digestion of carbohydrates. Saliva changes
the carbohydrates into sugar. It also dilutes the food substance so that they easily reach the
stomach.

The stomach is a big baglike structure. When the food reaches the stomach, the glands in the
wall of the stomach secrete hydrochloric acid which mixes in the food. Then by the move-
ment of the muscles, the food is churned and after 3 to 4 hrs it is sent through the pylorus wall

[35]
