at Pubabex ¢
Iga

over the body. Some directly arise from the brain. These are called cranial nerves. These are
12 in number. Rest all the nerves arise from different parts of the spinal cord. These are 31
pairs. The transmission in the whole body is via these nerves.

The brain has two broad divisions. Firstly a small brain and the other big brain. The different
parts of the big brain perform different kinds of work. For example, they provide the knowledge
of pain, touch, hot or cold etc. Some parts perform the task of analysis while some store the
events as memory. The left part of big brain controls the right half of body while the right half of
it controls the left half of the body.

The smaller brain controls the different muscles of the body. It controls the movement of joints
and all other body movements.

6. Muscular System-

Different types of muscles form this system. All kinds of body
movements are regulated by the influence of nervous sysiem on
the muscles.

The human body has two kinds of muscles.

1) The muscles which are regulated by one’s will. For ex-
ample the muscles of arms, legs, tongue etc. These are
called voluntary muscles.

2) The muscles which are not under one’s control for ex- | j
ample muscles of heart,. stomach, intestines etc. These }'
are called involuntary muscles.

The muscles have the property of contraction and flexibility. They
cover the bones of the body. They provide a shape and struc-
ture to the body. Voluntary muscles are attached to the bones
via tendons.

By the property of contractibility and expansibility of muscles,
the movements of arms, legs and neck are carried on.

7. Bony System —

The bone system is made up of approx. 206 bones. These bones | 4
join together to form a strong structure of human body. Some
basic functions of this bone system are to protect the soft tissues Muscular System

and organs of body and support them and to make the body

mobile in required manner. The hard bones move on the joints as a lever due to which some
specific activities of the body are conducted. Instead of this, some long bones like the hip
bones, chest bone or stemum and the leg bones have in them a bone marrow where fresh
blood in formed. In children, the bones are not completely developed. Seeing the development

[37]
