built in humans for reproduction and
childbirth. In males and females there
are different types of reproductive or-
gans —

A. Extemal

B. Internal. Sfae Spermatic duct
‘ . . Z Urinary Bladd
The reproductive organs which are vis- nen eet

ible outside are called external repro-
ductive organs. In males these exter- —_
; Epididymis
nal organs are the penis and scrotum .
Fi ( ik 3 Glans
and in females these are the vagina ( BP Prepuce
and the breast. :

Prostate

Scrotum
The internal reproductive organs in fe-
malesare the uterus, ovaries and ovi ducts
which are situated in the pelvic cavity.
Similarly the intemal reproductive organs in males are testis, sperm ducts, sperms and urethra.

Male Reproductive system

The ovary produces the ova or egg
and the testis produces the sperm.
When the ova and sperm meet
then the embryo is created.

It is noticable that the ova and

aaa : sperm have half-half chromosomes

Wise ene (23). When the ova and sperm

al Clitoris meet then complete 46 chrome-
Urethral opening somes are available.

Vagina

Tindélabla: Quer abia The birth of the male and female

child depends on the sex chromo-
somes. These are of two types — X
and Y. In the ova of females there
is a pair of XX chromosome and in the sperm of male there is a pair of XY chromosome. At the
time of union if the X chromosome of female joins with the X chromosome of male then a
female child is born and if the X-chromosome of female joins with the Y chromosome of male
then a male child is born. In this manner the birth of male and female child depends on the X
and Y chromosome of the male only.

Female Reproductive system

9. Endocrine system —

This system has various kinds of endocrine glands for example thyroid, pituitary, adrenal etc.
From these a number of important and usefu! hormones are secreted which are responsible for
various activities and changes in the body.

[39]
ATHREMO-Liice STRUCTURE OF WUCLELC ACTOS PrP

RRore oN Foun cw
- EN NUCLEUS OF most Live NA CELL, ChRayra
Gener. TNFRMATILIN INTHE EGeMOF AGWES”

Ushoms Some —
