The endocrine glands are such glands whose
secretions are not through any other duct but
directly into the blood and reach the related or-

gan. These glands are situated in the various Pituitary
parts of the body. The main endocrine glands

are described below. Thyroid
a) Pituitary gland- ~_.. Parathyroid

Thymus

This gland is situated in the lower front part
of the brain. From this various types of hor-
mones are secreted in the blood. These hor-
mones besides controlling the activities of
the body also control other endocrine
glands. The hormones secreted from this
pituitary gland are described below.

I. Thyroid stimulating hormone- (TSH) -
This hormone helps to control all the activi-
ties of the thyroid for example- converting
iodine into thyroid hormone, controlling its
flow in blood.

II, Andrino cortico tropic hormone (ACTH)-
This hormone controls the development of
adrenal gland and its effect on various meta- °

bolic activities like growth of muscular gly- Testes
cogen, collection of fat etc. {in males;
III. Growth hormone- This hormone is re-
sponsible for the growth of the various tis-
sues of body. By its secretion the height of Endocrine system

children increases. When it is secreted in

less quantity then the height remains short.

WV, Follicle stimulating hormone- (FSH) - It plays an important role in the formation of ova-
rian follicle in the ova of females and also formation of sperms in males.

V. Leutinising hormone (LH) — This is responsible for the formation of corpus luteus in fe-
males and also helps in the development of mammary glands in pregnant woman. In males
also this kind of hormone has an effect on the testis and secretes a youth hormone called
testosterone.

The posterior part of the pituitary gland also secretes two hormones-

1. Oxytosin- In females this hormone increases the contractibility of the uterine muscles. It
also has its effect on the nearby cells of the milk channel in the mammary gland.

2. Anti diuretic hormone- (ADH) - By its effect the quantity of urine is reduced. It

Ovaries
(in femates)

[40]
