helps in the absorption of water by the vessels in the kidneys. When ADH is less secreted the
absorption of water by the kidneys is reduced. By this the quantity of urine increases and
sugar is secreted in urine. This is called diabetes insipidus. Hyper secretion of this hormone
causes high blood pressure.

b) Thyroid gland-

This gland is situated in the front, lower part of the neck. This gland has left and right two
parts. Thyroid gland secretes a hormone thyroxin, which controls the metabolic activities of
various tissues. Along with the growth hormone this thyroxin helps in the development of the
brain. Hyposecretion of the thyroxin hormone causes deformity in the shape of body parts
and its excess secretion causes hyperthyroidism.

Besides this the growth of its size develops a disease named goiter. This disease is due to
deficiency of iodine.

c) Parathyroid gland-

These glands are attached to the thyroid gland. They are of the size of pea and are four in
number. From this a parathormone hormone is secreted which helps in the control of calcium
and phosphorus circulation and their roles in metabolic activities. If this hormone is excess,
the bones become porous and weak and there appears stone in kidneys. By deficiency of
parathormone there is also calcium deficiency leading to a disease named tetanus in which
calcium tablets are given.

d) Adrenal gland-

These glands are situated above each of the kidneys. Each gland has two parts a cortex and
medulla. From them different kinds of hormones are secreted. From the cortex are secreted
mineralo- corticoids i.e. carbohydrates and sex hormones. Various cortico-steroids prevent
the mineral salts from leaving the body i.e. sodium, potassium etc. and hence they increase
the quantity of water in tissues. Some of them also increase the level of sugar in blood. Gluco-
corticoids are also useful for carbohydrate metabolism in body. If there are excess number of
steroids in body then blood pressure rises, and by the damage of lymphatic tissue, the resis-
tance of body towards infections decreases. Under the category of sex hormones, in males
are androgens and in female estrogen lowers down.. There effect is similar to the hormones of
testes and ovaries. By this deficiency addison disease and by their excessive secretion, cushing
syndrome appears.

From the medulla of adrenal two important hormones adrenaline and nor adrenaline are
secreted. During any injury or shock, adrenalin is secreted in excess quantity to protect
from damages. By this, the low blood pressure is raised. It also increases the heartbeat and
breathing rate.

e) Thymus Gland -

This gland is placed above the heart and in between the lungs. It increases in children upto 2
yrs and after that it contracts into a smaller size and in an adult person it is only present as
remains or nervous tissue. Its structure is like a lymphatic gland. It produces antibodies and
Tlymphocytes.

[41]
