f) Pineal Gland.-
This gland is of red colour and has the shape of a nodule. It is situated behind the third
ventricle of the brain. The functions of this gland are still unknown.

10. Lymphatic system-

Lymphatic system plays an important role in the protection of body. Hence a brief description of
this system is required here. The lymphatic system is composed of lymphatic fluid, lymphatic
cells, lymphatic glands and lymphatic nodes.

The lymph fluid comes from the filtration through small blood vessels and it cannot retum back.
The lymphatic cells are spread like fine vessels in between the tissues and they collect the fluid
from the tissues and send it to the lymphatic vessel. To prevent the lymph from flowing into the
backward direction, there are valves.

The lymph nodes are of the size of the tip of a pin and/or of the size of an almond. The lymph
vessel brings lymph to them. In these lymph nodes are white blood cells. Lymph nodes filter the
bacteria and help to prevent many types of Infections. The formation of white blood cell for the
blood takes place at a lymph node. They also produce some antibodies for the protection of the
body.

11. Spleen -

Spleen is a large node of lymphatic tissue. By its function, it is a part of blood circulatory systern.
Spleen is of purple red colour and is situated on the upper left comer of the abdomen. Inside the
spleen, there is a dense fluid with many types of cells. Among them are phagocytes. Inside the
spleen when the red blood cells are broken down, these phagocytes eat them up.

In spleen fresh lymphocytes are formed which help to fight with various Infections. In malaria,
typhoid fever etc the size of spleen increases. It is also known that it produces some antibodies to
fight with diseases. In some situations like heamolytic anemia and blood cancer (Leukemia) it is
removed by operations.

Organs Body system
Brain Nervous system
Lungs Circulatory system
Heart Respiratory system
Stomach Digestive system
Small intestine Excretory System

Large Intestine Muscular system
Liver Bony system

Gall bladder Reproductive system
Pancreas Endocrine system
Spleen Lymphatic system
Kidney

Urinary Bladder

[42]
