Chapter 8
Samanya Vishesh (Common - Specific)

This samanya vishesh concept is again from the ancient text ‘Ayurved’ depicting the two
categories of the whole cosmos & its components.

We find different types of objects in this world full of diversities. This world has rivers,
mountains, plants and various kinds of living beings. Each of these has specific impor-
tance. In this Infinite cosmos every river, every mountain, every tree, every living being,
each has its unique identity. If we analyze any of these objects or identity then we find its
specific activity and its specific shape and size. Therefore if we try to find out objects with
specific structure and function, then they are so much in number that we cannot count
them. If we only try to study the human beings (Among all other living beings) then we find
that in a small village (component of the cosmos) there are so many types of human beings
that we are unable to know their specific attributes. It becomes impossible to reach every
human being and count them. In such a condition talking about the whole world or the
whole cosmes is beyond are physical capacity and seems like impossible imagination.

The question arises can we really achieve the knowledge of specific objects filled in this
cosmos? To know the different identities existing in specific forms- can any knowledge be
obtained by studying them in a collective form? Practically, the concept of samanya (com-
mon) is the solution of this problem. We may not be able to know the different objects in
separate forms, but on the basis of some common attributes and symptoms, we can clas-
sify them into different groups and develop a common understanding. For example Ram,
Shyam, Mahesh, Dinesh etc. are separate and specific persons and they have separate
uniqueness. But all of them are human beings as humanity, which is a common attribute
among them. On the basis of this common attribute, they are classified under humans and
the common attributes of humanity like socialism, intelligence are related to them. It is
clear that the formation of a cast or group is possible by the concept of samanya. Hence
commonness is that principle by which we come to know the common attributes of all
objects, living beings, attributes etc. This principle of commonness is most important to
know “ myself and like myself.”

Vishesh (Specific) - The above analysis makes it clear that every human, object or ele-
ment has separate, special attribute due to which that person, object and substance has
its specific identity. These specific attributes are naturally present in every person. As
every element has separate attributes hence these are infinite (vishesh) in the whole cos-
mos. Therefore there are infinite specific attributes seen as Vishesh present in physical
form and the attributes of specificity are also present on metaphysical levels. Hence it also
has both physical and metaphysical dimensions. Every object, person and element has its
special identity because of this “vishesh”. Due to this very identity, the object appears
unique in the whole cosmos. Hence “Separation” is the special feature of vishesh. The
principle of specificity identifies the uniqueness in all objects, persons, attributes etc due
to which each has its home, specific name, place, attribute, activity, emotions etc.

(43]
