Samanya (Commonness) - To know and understand the infinite objects and identities
in the cosmos, they are classified in the different groups on the basis of some fundamental
attributes. This classification is based on the concept of samanya. Due to this common-
ness, we make some beliefs about all the members of a specific group. For example if we
count the number of persons like Ram, Shyam, Mahesh, Suresh, Dinesh etc there is no
limit to it. As there are infinite numbers in the whole cosmos. As they are uncountable, it is
impossible to know about their specific attribute also. But on the basis of commonness
these persons can be classified into a group of humans and on the basis of common
attributes of humans, as human is an intelligent being. So Ram, Shyam, Mahesh, Suresh,
Dinesh, etc are also intelligent beings. Similarly by the common attributes of animals, we
can know about a cow, buffalo, goat, horse etc.

The commonness in the uncountable members of one class and similarities in them is due
to samanya. On the basis of samanya only, we can confidently say that all animals have
four legs and human is a living being with two legs.

The concept of commonness is a universal concept. Specific persons like Ram, Shyam,
Mahesh, Suresh, Dinesh etc. die with time but humanness is a continued concept. Simi-
larly the cow we see in front of us also vanishes but the common attribute of cowness exist
in all the cows of past, present and future, representing the universal concept of samanya.
In this world there are infinite cows but the attributes of cowness in all of them is one. This
number cannot be more than one.

In this manner commonness is present and exists in all types of specific elements, but it
remains only one.

On the concept of commoness it is possible to establish the comparison phenomena be-
cause we can compare only these two objects or persons which are common is some way.
During the study of Ayurvedic correspondence system we observed some common speci-
alities between a human body and palms and on the basis on these common attributes we
are able to establish this comparative analysis.

Commonness and specificity is a comparative concept, which changes with situations. At
one time, an object or identity is placed in the category of common while at some other
time it is placed in group of specific. This can be explained by an example comparing with
the cosmos. India is a unique identity i.e. cosmos is the common identity in which India is
the specific identity. But if we observe same place within India, then India will be a com-
mon identity and that place will be a specific identity. Comparing with Uttar Pradesh,
India is a common identity while Uttar Pradesh is specific data. On further thinking on
this concept, Uttar Pradesh is common identity while Allahabad is specific place in at-
tributes.

If we try to apply this Samanya Vishesh concept in human body, then we find that in the
whole world the humans represent a common thinking but Indians will be known by their

[44]
