special thinking. The persons residing in Allahabad will be known by this specific identity
when compared to the ones living in Uttar Pradesh or India. In the concept of human
body, the palms and soles present specific identities as compared to the whole body and
this human body will be known as one complete human. Again on observing the palm the
fingers are specific units while the palm is common. Similarly comparing with the human
body, the brain comes under specific group, while comparing with cerebellum a part of
brain, the brain comes under common group.

General and specific are complimentary to each other. At one place the commonness
brings about togetherness but not diversity. Similarly on the other side, specificity pro-
duces separate identity which develop uniqueness but it cannot lead to perfection. Com-
mon and specific together make possible the concept of unity in diversity. There is a beau-
tiful example of the Indian culture in which so much diversity reflects togetherness.

Commonness is responsible for progress and specificity for separation. In a heap of cere-
als if we mix wheat, rice, pulse etc then it will form a big quantity of cereal while we can
form separate group of wheat, rice etc by separations, by the vision of vishesh.

Any one identity can include both common and specific concept according to situation.
By the common principle any one person can be therapist. On the basis of specificity, he/
she can be a heart specialist. General physicians is a common group in which specific
heart specialist, psycho-specialist etc are included.

On studying the treatment pattern we commonly treat both the eyes on finger no(3) but
specifically left eye on (3) and Rt eye on (4). Further to treat a specific part of eye, the right
eye is kept in the common group and the spec’fic part is treated specifically. The concept
of common and specific is not only limited with treatment but is included is every aspect of
life.

It is clear that to understand the infinite elements in the cosmos, the concept of common-
ness is required because we can reassure the infinity and divide it into various groups due
to this common and specific concept. In a daily life the process of understanding cannot
start without the common and specific concept. This can be further explained by an ex-
ample. We daily observe the sun rises in the east which is a specific event. These specific
events happening every day help us to be sure that the sun will always rise from the east
and this develops a common understanding. This proves that the concept of commonness
without the daily routine cannot be performed. In the absence of commonness, a similar
condition is developed and we cannot imagine about similarity and differentiation.

This wonderful principle of common and specific is used in 10 origin principle to deter-
mine the attributes of an element. The 10 elements Akash, Vayu, Agni, Jal, Prithvi, Kaal,
Disha, Mann, Atma and Tam with their common and specific attributes are given in the
table below.

[45]
