basis of regulation of all activities. All the various activities happening in a human body system
are possible because of this Vata. It is clear that to make the body active and alert, Vata has an
important role. In Ayurvedic bio-clock, the time period from 12 at night to 8 in the moming has
been given to Vata.

Pitta is the basis of all types of chemical activities happening in the body. In Pitta there is a
unique balance of Agni and Jal mahabhoot (fire and water elements). Due to Pitta the diges-
tion of food is possible. To maintain the body temperature, Pitta plays on important role. Pitta
originates the hunger and thirst and provides the message to take in food and water. The
digestion of food, it’s absorption, nourishment and its transformation into energy is done by
Pitta. Hence by the activity of Pitta the body remains radiant, soft and intelligent. In Ayurvedic
bio clock, among the 24 hrs, the time period from 8 in the moming to 4 in the evening has been
allotted to Pitta.

Kapha is the indication of stability in our body. In Kapha there is a unique combination of Jal
and Prithvi mahabhoot (water and earth element). In different organs of the body the necessary
lubrication is possible by Kapha. Just opposite to the symptoms of Vata, Kapha produces drowsi-
ness. As the whole body activity is activated by Vata, similarly after whole days work, the re-
quired rest is provided by Kapha. With the help of this drowsiness, we proceed, towards com-
plete rest. The time period of Kapha in Ayurvedic bio clock is from 4 in the evening to 12 at night.

If we try to regulate are food, study, daily routine and sleeping time, according to this Ayurvedic
bio clock, then we shall definitely lead a healthy and long life as a natural phenomena.

Diet-

It is very true that a person is born on this earth with a definite energy. We require this energy
life long to keep ourselves healthy and active, to proceed our life and to achieve our purpose.
All this energy is collected by a healthy diet. Are daily diet keeps us continuously energetic and
lively. If this diet is not according to the body requirement or not received at proper time, then
even the most healthy food cannot provide the body energy properly. Hence it is important to
know what kind of food we should eat, how and when we should have the food.

If we talk about a balanced diet then according to the ayurvedic principle, we should eat such
a food, which includes all the basic tastes i.e. it should include spicy, sweet, pungent and salty
tastes. Such food is called a balanced diet. Excessiveness of any particular taste and negli-
gence of any specific taste, can lead to some or the other disease in due course of time.

By the scientific view a balanced diet has the following main elements in the given ratio-

Carbohydrates- 40-50%
Protein- 15-20%
Fatty substance 3-5%

Vitamins- 20-25%

Fibrous elements- 5-7%

[48]
