To make the food useful for the body, it should be taken in such a manner that the body system
related to its digestion may collect the nutritive elements and transport it to proper places. For
this it is necessary that before swallowing the food, it should be properly chewed. The work of
chewing the food is done by our teeth. Hence it is most important for the teeth to be healthy so
that they can do the work of cutting, tearing and grinding of food. If the food is kept in the
mouth and chewed at least 15-16 times then it mixes with the saliva and forms the bolus. In
such a condition when this food travels in the stomach through the oesophagus, the work of
digestion will be completed properly.

Now the question arises that when we should eat food. We have observed that in the Ayurvedic
bio clock the time of Pitta starts from 8 in the moring. On further sub division of 8 a.m. to 4
pm (Pitta time) the 10-2 period, is of Pitta- Pitta i.e. it is the highest Pitta time of our body.
Earlier, we have understood that Pitta is basically responsible for digestion. If we take the food
at this time then the body is ready to digest the food properly for maintaining good health.
Hence 10 a.m. can be deputed as the time for the moming meal. This is the common time for
most of the working places. This co-incident, that a naturally set time of offices is left for the
teaders to analyse and thereby reach to the essence of divinity within humanity.

For the evening meal the Kapha time period from 4 p.m.-12 a.m. is subdivided including
Kapha- Pitta time i.e. 6-8 p.m. It is clear that at this time the Kapha is in combination with
Pitta. Hence for the digestion at food this is the best suitable time. Hence the evening meal
should be taken between 6-8 p.m.

Sleep-

According to the Ayurvedic bio-clock, among the regulated 24 hrs, 8 hours are allotted for
rest. Hence for the healthy adult person 8 hours sleep is sufficient but on the basis of practical
experiences we have found that by different age groups, the period of sleep time varies. It has
been classified in the following table.

For every age group the persons should take sleep according to the above table. If a person has
less sleep or no sleep at all or excess sleep then all these three conditions indicate towards a

[49]
