bad health. We all know that insufficient sleep in due course of time can lead to mental disor-
ders. Hence we should never neglect these symptoms.

Now the question arises that when we should go for sleep. To know this we have to again study
the Ayurvedic bio-clock. We have seen that 8 p.m. at night is the time of Kapha- Kapha and
this Kapha produces drowsiness. Hence the time of 8 p.m onwards indicates that we should
take rest after the whole days work. The most suitable time for sleep is from 8 p.m - 12p.m.
After this the Vata period arises and it is the time of creative activities. It has been said in the
religious books that we should get up in the divine period of morning and think about our
duties and working schedule. It is clear that by this thinking process, we are prepared physi-
cally and mentally for the next days work and activities. In the early morning time we make a
plan of the whole day, determine the goal and think about how to achieve these plans and
goals. Are experience tells that all the leamed scholars make a chart of the daily routine at 1-3
a.m. in the moming and this time becomes a part of their daily routine to analyse and negoti-
ate.

Excretion of wastes -

In the early moming by passing the stool, we make our digestive system once again active.
The morning time of 6-8 is of Vata Kapha. For the excretion of stool, Vata provides the move-
ment and Kapha loosens it so that it is easily excreted. Hence the time of Vata Kapha is perfect
for excretion of stool.

To know that our digestion system is working properly or not, we have to daily observe are
excretions. On observing the stool if we find the colour is not proper or we have to go many
times or it has lot of smell then we should be aware and alert about the irregularity of our
digestive system. A healthy person should have the following type of stool-

1. The stool should be in binded form

2. Itshould be golden in colour.

3. In one day should not be more than two times.

4. Itshould have no smell.

The above kind of naturally excreted stool indicates about a healthy digestive system. Such a
stool prevents us from constipation. We all know that constipation leads to many diseases.
One of such diseases is piles which definitely is a chronic and painful illness. We can keep our
digestive system healthy and thereby get away from many diseases.

Water intake and urine excretion-

We all know that water is present in our body in maximum quantity as compared to other
elements. Daily we also take in water by which all are body systems work properly. As a
general rule to make the kidneys active, 3-4 liters of water should be taken daily. Less or more
water can affect the activity of kidney. Our intake of water depends upon our thirst. Hence if
one is very much thirsty or has no thirst at all, then it definitely indicates some disease develop-
ing inside. In general we should not take water immediately after food or along with food

[50]
