because this water cools the digestive fire which becomes slow and the food is not digested
properly.

On a regular basis when we take in water the body uses the required amount and the rest of
the water is excreted out through the urinary bladder. This excreted water in the from of urine
also removes many toxic elements dissolved in it and not required by the body. Hence regu-
lated excretion is necessary to keep the body healthy. We should also be careful that if the
colour of urine is not normal and frequency is more then it definitely indicates some illness.
Normal parameters of urine excretion are as follows —

1. The colour of urine should be light golden.

2. In males the urine frequency in 24 hours, should be 4-5 times.

3. In females the urine frequency in 24 hrs is 5-6 times.

4, During the excretion of urine we should not feel any discomfort or pain and buming.

Pulse rate-

The heart provides the life force to every cell of body by the help of oxygen through blood. This
organ working continuously from birth and throughout life, is most important for our lives. A
healthy heart is most productive for life. Hence we should always be alert about its working. By
the study of pulse rate we can know about heart. The normal pulse rate can be divided into the
following groups-

1. A child’s normal pulse rate is 140 per minute.

2. In males the normal pulse rate is 70-72 per minute.

3. In females the normal pulse rate is 75-76 per minute.

If pulse rate is not according to the above pattem then we should be alert about the chronic
heart disease which may occur in future.

Arms and legs-

The arms and legs are important among our karmendrayas or action organs. They are in
direct control of brain and hence are called extensions of the brain. By their position also we
can know about the good and bad health. Our hands and feet should neither be very cold nor
very hot. Specifically sweating in palms and soles indicate some disease inside the body. It is
clear that the healthy person should have dry hands and feet.

In this manner by observing different organs and excretions of body and a regulated routine
and proper water intake and sleep etc help us to achieve good health easily.

(51)
