Chapter 3

Ayurvedic Acupressure

Ayurvedic Acupressure holds within itself two unique dimensions of knowledge. Probably
Acupressure & Ayurved are in itself potent thought patterns and their combination has brought
about unique mode of treatment of human ailments.

Ayurved is composed of two words ayu + ved. Here Ved means knowledge & Ayu means life
from its beginning to its end. Hence the study to attain the knowledge of life from birth to death
can be known by Ayurved.

Salient features of Ayurvedic Acupressure-

A

Ayurvedic Acupuncture is composed of two words i.e. Ayurveda + Acupuncture.
It means that Acupuncture which is based on the visions of Ayurveda, called
Ayurvedic Acupuncture or Acupressure. In this book basically we will deal with
Acupressure, not Acupuncture but not without much difference in heir effectivity
because the only difference between Acupressure and Acupuncture is-in Acupunc-
ture we use the needles on certain points of energy whereas in Acupressure we
stimulate the energy by virtue of either pressure or by some seeds. On the points of
energy we can also apply the colour but with the different names i.e. the chromo-
therapy but more or less, the principles of Acupressure/Acupuncture or chromo
therapy or magneto therapy are one and the same. In our practice, the best modal-
ity of Acupressure is by virtue of using very small magnets which have been gener-
ated in Korea by Prof. Park Jae Woo, the inventor of onnuri medicine or Sujok
Acupressure. This is the simplest & most effective form of Acupressure. Though it
is Acupressure by magneto or in other words we may call it magneto therapy but in
short its nomenclature is Acupressure.

As we have said in the preceeding paragraph, that there is no difference in the
principles of Acupressure & Acupuncture. But one more modality of Acupressure
is invoked in the western countries which we call the Reflexology. Certainly it is a
different mode but in the Acupuncture, which has been developed in china which
we know by the name of Classical Acupuncture, because of its pricking torture of
needles, we have opted for the pressure or the application of the colour or putting
the small magnets which Prof. Park has developed & given the name as byol
magnets.

Whenever we talk about Acupuncture, we have to consider the principles of
Classical Acupuncture as propounded by the Chinese philosophers. Here also in
short, we will discuss the sali i

