wToRy CONOLTLON OCS KZ

a - Inerame
Ly ieee Redness) iTeH ENG,

x»

causing trouble to any person then treatment on right thumb can be given by methi strips on
joints. On this level, in acute illness, treatment on right thumb while in chronic illness treatment
on right big toe is to be done (as zero element representatives)

Treatment related to first element - Akash

For the treatment of first element (Akash) the right small finger or right small toe is selected. The
first element is related to the Akash mahabhoot and its main organs are lungs and large intes-
tine. Hence the problem related to these organs as cold, cough, breathlessness, constipation
etc. are treated by twisting the right small finger/toe. Along with twist, methi strip can be ap-
plied on the various joints of the finger for easy treatment. Specifically, the relation of the base
joint of the finger is with lungs while the upper joint is of large intestine. Hence for treatment of
lungs, specifically the base joint is to be selected and for large intestine problem the upper joint
of this finger/toe can be used to apply methi strip.

The hearing sense organ ear is plotted on the mid joint of finger number one hence any ail-
ments of ear can be treated by twist, pressure or methi strip on mid joint. The right ear as a
hole is related to this element Akash and hence it can also be treated specifically on the mid
joint of the finger.

The skin of our body is known as the covering and is representative of Akash element. Hence
skin disorders as itching, eczema etc are also treated on the mid joint of this finger by methi
strip.

Treatment related :to second element - Vayu

The element number two is related to the left small finger or toe. The element number two i.e.
Vayu has an important role in our lives. All the activities and creative functions of our life are
initiated by vayu. The organs related to this element are heart and small intestine. Hence for
their treatment we have to select the left small finger or toe. These fingers can again be twisted
and treated as previously discussed. For specific treatment the lower joint is of heart and upper
joint of small intestine and hence can be treated here easily.

Asa hole where right ear is related to element one, so also the left ear is related to number two.
Hence for the left ear, specific treatment can be done on the mid joint of this finger.
Treatment related to the third element - Agni

The third element Agni plays an important role in our lives. Agni is responsible for all the
chemical activities of the body hence as a chemical laboratory, liver and gall bladder are
related to this element. The finger related to this element is left index finger and toe. The carrier
of the chemical activities of the body and hold an important place in the activity of the whole
body, the liver and gall bladder are held responsible and are the basis of diseases in any of the
other organs of body. On the other hand to make the body healthy and active throughout the
whole life, they play an important role. They are also important in the formation process of
blood as major body fluid. Hence its treatment is also useful for blood disorders. For nodes all
over the body or imbalance of cholesterol, this finger/toe organs are most important for treat-
ment. The treatment of sleep disorders has also been found successful on the joints of this
finger. By applying methi seeds on the upper joint of left index finger, the simplest form of
treatment of tiredness can be done. Specifically by applying methi seeds on the base joint of

[96]
