this finger the treatment of liver related diseases is easily possible. The upper joint of this finger
is related to gall bladder and its disorders. By applying a methi strip on the mid joint of this
finger, the treatment of blood and cholesterol etc can be easily done.

As a sense organ the eyes are related to the element three. Hence for the general treatment of
both eyes, the mid joint of finger three is selected. Specifically, the left eye has been given the
number three as a hole hence its treatment on mid joint of left Index finger is highly effective.
Other diseases like diabetes, migraine, indigestion, vomiting, gas, belching, chronic constipa-
tion etc. can also be easily treated by just applying methi strips on all joints of left index finger.
Treatment related to fourth element - Jal

In our human body the organs kidney and urinary bladder are related to fourth element. In
ayurvedic 10 origin principle the fourth element is considered as Jal (water). In our lives this
element is most useful and it is also said that water is one form of life (Jal he jeevan hai). Our
Right Index finger and Right Index toe are related to this element. Hence imbalance of water
and its related disorders can be treated on this finger by twist, pressure or methi strip.

For the treatment of kidney the base joint of this finger is specifically chosen. Pressing or
twisting on this joint or a methi strip here can treat any chronic diseases related to kidney. On
this finger treatment at the upper joint is related to urinary bladder.

Our tongue is related to the sense of taste and is related to the fourth element. Hence the
treatment of taste related disorder is commonly done on finger number four.

As discussed earlier, the left eye is treated on finger three, similarly the right eye as a hole can
be specifically treated on the mid joint of finger four i.e. right index finger.

Treatment related to the Fifth element - Prithvi

By the ayurvedic 10 origin principle the prithvi mahabhoot has been given the status of fifth
element. This earth element has an important role to produce stability in our body. Our right
ting finger and right ring toe are related to the prithvi element. On this finger two important
organs stomach and spleen are plotted. Hence the treatment of gastritis, gastric ulcer is easily
done on the upper joint of right ring finger, related to stomach organ. The lower joint is treated
for spleen related disorders like fever, cough and cold, boils, injuries, tiredness etc. Besides this
the diseases of lymphatic system, various diseases due to infection of GIT, disorders due to
blood toxicity like boils, pus, skin diseases, breathlessness etc, can be treated on right ring
finger by pressing, twisting or applying methi strip on the joint.

As a sense organ the nose is related to element five. Hence diseases related to the nose like,
nose watering, polyps, nasal septum deviation, sinusitis etc can be treated on the mid joint of
finger five. Specifically the right nostril is treated on finger five.

Treatment related to the sixth element - Kaal

In ayurvedic 10 origin principle time has been named as the sixth element. We all know that for
every event, there is some contribution of time energy. We can also say that time controls and
regulates our entire lives. In our body time represents the nervous system. Hence our spinal
cord as an important component of nervous system is related to time. It is clear that for any
problem related to the spine, the element six is to be treated i.e. time element. Hence for the
ailment, of spine related problems as pain in different regions of back, disorders of nervous

{97}
