system etc left ring finger is to be treated. Specifically different regions of the body can be
treated on finger six which are as follows.

L.

Ill.

The treatment of cervical spondylosis is successfully carried out on the upper joint of
left ring finger by pressing, twisting or applying methi strip.

|. The upper and middle part of back can similarly and very easily be treated on the mid

joint of left ring finger. Along with this the treatment of heart and liver related diseases
is also given on the mid joint of this finger.

The low back pain or lumbago is treated on the base joint of left ring finger. Similarly
for this pain the lower phalanx (part of finger between mid and lower joint) is also used.
and five star magnets can be applied here. Besides this, swelling in anus, bed wetting,
menstrual problems etc are also treated on base joint.

The treatment of sciatica nerve is also done on the base joint of finger six very effec
tively.
Diseases due to seasonal changes give astonishing results on finger no. 6 as follows-

a. Treatment of Summer and related diseases- In the environment sudden increase
in temperature causes afflictions of the nervous system and many related symp-
toms arise like heat stroke, burning in eyes, redness in eyes, vertigo, sudden faint-
ing, sudden rise in B.P hemorrhage etc. To get relief from all these problems, the
upper joint of finger six (related to summer season) is treated by pressure, twist or
methi strip.

b. Problems due to winter seasons- In cold weather, sudden fall in temperature
causes body ache, joint pains, headache, cold and cough, fever, H.B.P etc. For
this treatment the base joint of finger six (related to cold) is treated.

c. Diseases of rainy season- The problems during rainy season like constipation ,
gastric, loose motion, vomiting, body ache, fever, headache etc are treated on the
mid joint of finger six (related to rainy season) as discussed earlier by pressure,
twist or a methi strip. We have found that finger No. 6 is effective for treatment of
the nervous system. We all know that by this nervous system, all our body organs
are related to the main source of energy i.e. brain. Hence any disorders of the
important organs of the body can be generally treated on finger no. six.

As the right nostril is related to element five similarly the left nostril is connected with finger no.
six. Hence the treatment of left nostril can be done on the middle joint of finger 6.

Humans usually express their thoughts through speech. This has been related to the sixth
element. Hence if we find difficulty in speaking, finger no. 6 is to be treated.

Treatment related to the seventh element - Disha

The element no. seven is related with the sense of direction. Being important part of the brain,
the general treatment of brain related disorders is given on element no. 7. Our left middle finger

[98]
