Chapter 2
Ayurvedic Similarity Principle (Tulyarthta Siddhant)

Similarity is a natural phenomenon. We usually compare two persons and try to find out some
similarity in them. When a child is born, the household ladies try to compare the child with the
members of the family in respect to body features and texture.

Ayurved propounds that, whatever is there in the cosmos, has in some way resemblance to the
human body and each object as such, it establishes the principle of likelihood/resemblance in
each and every object which is the part of cosmos itself. Hence the theory of micro and macro is
laid down. Micro is the part of macro which is in some way in features and constitution similar
to macro (i.e. cosmos). This principle of resemblance has been originally given the nomenclature
of “Tulyarthta” which has been made the basis for treatment finding out the similarities in the
human body with the palm and sole, which is in some manner similar to human body but in the
micro form. Thus satisfying the principle of macro and micro, here macro is human body and
palms and soles are micro which are component parts of human body and micro in nature and
bear the perfect resemblance of human body of which these are the components.

This concept of Tulyarthta, which is predominantly Vedic, has been used for the first time by
Korean eminent scholar and scientist Prof. Park Jae Woo and made this concept the sole basis
for treatment by Acupressure and Acupuncture; which has been proved very effective to re-
move the disease process from the body. This very concept is being furthered by our Sansthan
on the basis of Ayurvedic vision. His thinking was purely vedic oriented which makes him
cosmic figure on account of the Universality of the Vedas. Let us now try to find out the various
stages of this Tulyarthta principle.

1. Human body and palm as one unit -
As the whole cosmos is one complete unit similarly the human body is also one com-

Human body Correspondence
(Second dimension) —> Cihird dimension)

2]
