at
rm

.
yo!

\, SP These meridians are said to be the parallels of life lines. According to them, human
being is created by virtue of these meridians & all the disease process arise through
ree , these meridians & virtually the cure can be obtained by these meridians. The sole
hol wy basis of the Chinese Acupuncture treatment system is based on the five element
oF a 5 theory i.e. the creature is made of five vital elements i.e. wood, fire, earth, sky &
® ry ia water. All these elements are respectively connected to each of the energy for ex-
Co ample wood is with the power of wind, fire with heat, earth with humidity, sky with
2) 4 dryness & water with coldness. According to Chinese concept, element & the rela-
4 tionship of the element & energy is basically the concept of physical & metaphysi-
cal. Element is physical whereas energy is metaphysical. Water is in the visible
rs form but coldness is in the form of metaphysics of the water. Further they enunci-
i ated the eight fundamental principles of Acupuncture i.e. yin-yang theory, internal
a & external, excess & deficiency and hot and cold.

4.

On the basis of all mentioned in the preceeding paragraphs, the Chinese philoso-

; phers have developed the entire canvas or they have made the fabric for the entire
9) treatment system by Acupressure/Acupuncture. While we are talking about
Ayurvedic Acupuncture, we will consider all the fundamentals of Acupuncture but

y the vision will be Ayurvedic; that is why a new modality of Acupressure which is

a? totally based on the concepts of Ayurveda has been developed.
A 5. Now on further analysis of the word Acupuncture, we find that this word Acupunc-
> ture is in itself composed of two words i.e. Acu & puncture. Acu means needle &

puncturing means piercing. In totality in perspective of Ayurveda, we can say the
minutest particle i.e. the,point which contains the energy can be stimulated just by
sheer amount of pressure on that point which invigorates the energy contained in
that point. This energy released from that point reaches to the point, may be very
distant and connected to the point of stimulus. Here we can further say, if we press
any point on our palm or finger or tip of finger, cerisinlu it has connection with onr

