10.

of pressing a point, the energy is released & with tremendous speed it reaches to
the point whereby it is connected & on nourishment or by removal of the blockage
or removal of the toxicity, any type of the hinderence or the disease process can be
removed. So we can call a system of the treatment which is based purely on the
divine concept of Ayurveda. Amazingly, the medicine in this system is the bioenergy
which is not created by human or other artificial sources. It is simply conferred
from almighty god, by virtue of the interaction of ova & sperm & that life force is
implanted by this action & develops & flows in the embryo and after the matura-
tion of the period which is stimulated by the birth of a baby which is a human
being, comes into existence & that very life process is hindered by virtue of this
Acupressure system. How this human body can always be maintained by stimula-
tion of the energy or by virtue of the transferring of the energy from a place of
excess to a place of deficiency & the health can be restored is a unique phenom-
enon in itself.

As the five element theory is the sole basis of Classical Chinese Acupressure or
Acupuncture, so is in Ayurvedic Acupressure but with some vital difference.

In Ayurvedic Acupressure, the five element theory has some strict format. All the
elements are put up in the strict order i.e. Akash, Vayu, Agni, Jal & Prithvi. Ancl
also, this order is strictly to be followed in elements preceeding i.e. Vayu includes
Akash, Agni includes Alash — Vayu, Jal includes Akash-Vayu-Agni & Prithvi in-
cludes Akash-Vayu-Agni-dal i.e. all preceeding four elements. This is the vital dif-
ference between the Chinese & Ayurvedic Acupressure. Even though each element
is an independent & separate entity but it has direct relationship with all the suc-
ceeding elements. In fact this feature of Ayurvedic Acupressure makes a wider
difference. It is logical & based on the reasoning. All these elements are supposed
to be the components of human body as well as they have parallels or similarities
on the macro level. In a similar manner, all these elements are the components of
the macro i.e. the Brahmand or cosmos.

Each element has specific tanmatra. In other words, as in Classical Acupuncture,
we can say this tanmatra is parallel to the concept of energy, which is treated as
metaphysical. It shows that each & every element is a unique combination of one
element & one specific tanmatra i.e. Bioenergy.

In Ayurvedic acupressure, the most vital salient feature is that the creature is the
unification of the human body & the soul. It shows that human body, which is
composed of five elements & each element is receptacle of specific tanmatra, here
soul represents the combination of all types of tanmatras which is at the back of
sensitivity in each of the elements. In wider aspect, five elements are physical in
nature & soul is metaphysical.

As discussed in the preceeding paragraphs, the creature is the co-existence of
physical & metaphysical & both are inseparable. In a living being, as soon as the

[14]
