11.

12.

13.

14.

16.

soul is departed or the sensitivity is gone from each element, there is nothing. We
can say, even if all the components of human body, do exist in the body but the
sensitivity is missing & in such case we call the departure.

This concept is squarely applicable to element & its connected tanmatra i.e. the
sensitivity.

Akash is connected with the shabd i.e. connected with the hearing. Vayu is associ-
ated with touch, again a vital sensitivity. Agni/fire which is connected with the
colour & texture or vision; water is associated with taste & finally Prithvi (Earth) is
associated with the smell i.e. sensitivity of smelling.

Therefore, as we have discussed above, the soul is nothing but the sensitivity. In
fact it is the combination of the various types of sensitivity.

Each element is being the receptacle of energy & both are inseparable for example
fire is known by its heat, therefore fire & heat are inseparable. Similarly water is
the receptacle of coldness & so water & coldness are inseparable.

Vayu is second element in order & it includes Akash. Its associated sensitivity is
the touch. The principle attribute of Vayu is motion. In Ayurvedic terminology, the
presence of Vayu element in human body can be seen by the facts that the blood is
always in motion in the blood vessels, flow of impulse in the nervous system, move-
ment of the neck, blinking of the eyes, even the expression or the speech, move-

vy ment of the four extremities etc are few examples of the attributes of Vayu. The

activity of almost all the organs is based on this element. In other words, we can
say, the creature, right from vibration to sensitivity, it is all on account of Vayu. On
the macro level, movements of celestial bodies & planets are responsible for the
rejuvination of their light and the time factor is important. Therefore Vayu is the
most vital element and vital for the existence of light etc. This sensitivity is mea-
sured by touch. Weather this touch is by hand shake or embrasing or touch on the
pulse region, touch of the head or by touch of the feet, it is the most vital factor for
measuring one’s sensitivity. On the metaphysical plane, imbalanced Vayu shows
the feeble mindedness. Since in Ayurvedic order, Vayu element is at number two
and as itis, it included number one also. Waves of wind creates some sound which
we call the rattling. Even twittering of the squirrels and chirping of the birds, these
are the examples of element number two i.e. Vayu and the sound and its expres-
sion; the chirping without a specific sound/expression, no hissing sound, nothing
symbolizes the presence of Akash/Shabd/silence included in Vayu. Vayu/Wind is
also responsible for the landslides, for the upsurge of the lava, sprouting and growth
of the plants, sowing of the seed i.e. Vayu is responsible from generation to degen-
eration. In the childhood, adolescence & thereby in old age, movements are slowed
down on account of less wind or Vayu.

In Ayurvedic elements fire is number three. It includes Akash and Vayu. The physical
form of fire is expressed in the terms of waves. Waves i.e. fire is perpetuated by wind

co {15}
