17.

18.

& the upsurging of the flames, it clearly indicates that the power of wind is also there.
That is why the flames of fire rise up higher. Agni is related with the fire of human
body. The temperature of body refers to the fire. Moreover, the blood flows through
the vessels, throughout the body; therefore warmth of the skin speaks the warmth of
the life force. We find out the difference between life and death. When the body is icy
cold i.e. the temperature of body falls down. The fire has dual function at the macro
& micro levels both, in respect of human body as well. Its function is to cook the food,
to bring the maturity & other vital function is to burn out the toxins, to bum out the
things which are waste, if it is in balanced form. If it is excess, it can burn the recep-
tacle as well i.e. where it resides. It shows the disease process. If there is less of fire, it
will not ripen, it will not mature, it will not cook, again it shows the disease process.
We eat the food, even though cooked food we eat, but inside the human body, a
great digestive system consisting of so many components, having a lot of heat & fire.
cooks the food again which is already cooked, in its own manner. In GIT, it produces
different types of acidic substances to kill the bacteria, to eradicate the virus, to bum
out the waste things. The associated sense of Agni is colour & texture and vision is
associated with it, meaning thereby if the colour of the blood, skin, nails, hair is not
in the normal stage, it shows the disease related to this element. Fire also brings
about the change i.e. the transformation.

dal is the fourth element in Ayurvedic five element theory. This element includes all
the preceeding elements i.e. Akash, Vayu and Agni. Water has very deep relation
with the fire (heat-temperature). While water is heated up, it converts into water
vapours and when the temperature is lowered down it becomes the solid form and
its existence is that the specific temperature is known to everybody. Therefore as
per the Ayurvedic vision we can say it has all the preceeding elements in it and the
water has its motion on account of the vayu it includes. Its principle attribute is to
combine, to mix, to associate. On account of this attribute, the process of assimi-
lation in body is on account of this element i.e. the body fluids inside the body
which is on account of Jal. Weather it is the dust, earth particles or the flour or any
other similar item, it provides them some form by combining hence flour with
water can make the bread otherwise bread was not possible. Weather physical or
metaphysical, all relations are based on the association and this sense of associa-
tion or combination is on account of this element. Therefore the entire social struc-
ture is based on account of this element which is manifested in the form of love.

Prithvi is the last & fifth physical element. It includes all the preceeding elements.
We can also see that below the crust of the earth, there are sources of artificial
water. We know that lava that comes out from the inside, meaning thereby the
existence of fire is present. Weak epicenters, part of earth which cause earth-
quakes i.e. a manifestation of strong Vayu element inside the earth and geogra-
phers have proved that the crust of earth is found in so many layers and it has
cavity, it has lot of space inside; this shows the presence of Akash. Earth is the

[16]
