19.

20.

model of the Ayurvedic concept. If this concept is not parallel to that of the Chinese
and we may call, while using in Acupressure, this concept is the strength of Ayurvedic
vision, and it has given added strength and power to the effectivity of this system.
The associated sense is smell. While earth has all elements inside it, then all the
primordial elements will ineract with each other. When out of proportion it will
make the waste product and similarly the associated sensitivity will be out of pro-
portion. In respect of the whole body, while all the elements are interacting, pre-
dominantly water with the different substances inside the body, when out of pro-
portion it can make the pus formation, it can form the fibroids, adhesions & there
are so many other manifestations likewise which manifest the disease process. As
the earth is at the number five and it includes all the four preceeding elements, it
means that by considering the disease process connected with this element, it will
be definitely a complex disease process. Tuberculosis or cancer or likewise degen-
erative disease processes can be attributed predominantly to this.

The attribute of earth is stability. In case of unstability of anything, we have to
consider the earth element to make anything stable.

In Classical Chinese Acupuncture, there was five element theory and it was used
for the treatment with great success. But as per Ayurvedic vision, we consider the
life as the unification of human body & life force in the form of soul. The sages and
saints further amplified this vision and took up to the number ‘nine’. Here from the
‘Charak Sanhita’ it is relevant to quote the shlok-this human body is composed of
nine elements as depicted here:

TROT AA: rey PART TATATE: |
area a a, Pa PrraererrTa

ie. Akash, Vayu; ‘oni, dal/ Prithvi‘ 1 vel as Atma, Mann, Kaal, Disha are the
group of vital elements. Sensitivity is life in these elements, else they are non living
or dead. This amplification of the five element theory upto nine elements which
constitute the creature & further tenth element was considered as a combination of
all nine & that made the ten elements as a whole. It is a very unique subject. It
needs elaboration. Here only it requires to summarize all the components and very
brief sketches of all the ten elements; after five physical elements, the sixth element
was the time factor, seventh was direction, eighth was Mann & ninth was soul, and
while combining all these five physical elements & all these four metaphysical
elements; these nine elements will be there. When all the nine elements are mixed,
then tenth element is known. When all the elements are mixed and meshed, which
in scriptures has been visualized as the doom’s day and thereafter, the sprout of the
life, or the new era begins so that tenth element, we consider as zero is responsible
for all creations and that element, we can know by “Sristi”.

In Ayurvedic vision, Mann has been taken as eighth element. As we know by its
nomenclature itself, it is predominantly a metaphysical aspect. The scholars may

{17]
