if the problem is near the lower neck joint or trunk area then lower joint of thumb is selected for
treatment. For this treatment any hand (left or right ) and its fingers can be classified and
selected based on five element concept. The finger which is stiff and painful on twisting, then
the related body part is the place where the disease resides. This treatment is very simple, easy
and highly effective.

4. Regional division of head -—

In the above figure the different regions of brain are divided, based on ayurvedic 10- origin
principle. The various regions of brain (Frontal, Parietal, Temporal and Occipital lobe) can
be treated on the phalanx of fingers by putting five star magnets. If in any part of head there
is pain due to injury, node, tumors, or cyst, etc. then on the basis of the above figure the
related finger and its phalanx is selected and treatment is given by star magnet or methi
seeds.

For example the zero area of the head in which the forehead, nose, mouth, front teeth and
frontal lobe of brain are covered, is divided into three parts. The upper part is called hetero,
middle part neutro and the lower part is called homo. Any of these three parts affected, is
related to the finger zero i.e. right thumb and effective treatment can be given by putting five
star magnets on phalanx or methi strip on joints. Similarly disease symptoms appearing in
the area of left ear or temporal lobe of brain, then the finger No. 6 is selected and the related
Homo, Hetero and Neutro regions are selected according to the position of disease and
simple treatment of five star magnet on the affected phalanx is given. On the back of head
the regions of origin numbers 7, 8 and 9 are manifested, hence for this area treatment of
both middle finger and left thumb is selected. In this manner on the basis of the regional
divisions of head and brain, a very simple and highly effective treatment can be done on the
finger phalanges. The arms being the action organ of the brain, hence the treatment given on
it has direct effect on the external and internal parts of the brain. In various acute and

[105]
