2
All the substances of the nature are composed of the above five mahabhoot. Our body is also
composed and made up of these five us Let us now consider the nature of these five
mahabhoots. wy ya .

Akash. 4V,\o wo gel ey

In Ayurvedic five element concept, Akash is first element and it has been depicted as the
covering over the entire cosmos. Akash is the space occupied by most macro particle and or to
the space occupied by entire cosmos. Also it speaks about the holes or the cavities inside the
most micro particle (cell level) to the macro object (human body). This approach is applied at
cosmic (Macro) and human (micro) levels. According to Ayurvedic concept, it has unique
feature of non-resistance meaning thereby we have lot of hurdles/resistance for any energy
particle in the form of vehicle, animals, human beings on the surface of Earth whereas there is
a least resistance while movement of aeroplanes & winged birds. In such space where there is
no resistance that is not a part of earth, that is beyond earth which we call sky as such the
Akash. Meaning of Akash is valuable in respect of various elements but unique sense of non
resistance prevails all through. Now amplifying this concept of Akash by using for treatment by
Acupressure, we find human skeleton or structure is covered by the skin & further all compo-
nents of human body such as heart is covered by pericardium, lungs are covered by pleura,
intestines are covered by mucal membranes, joints are covered by synovial membranes and
even the most micro fibres of nerves are covered by myelin sheath. Another salient feature of
Akash element is expressed by porosity i.e. from pores, cavity and biggest holes like mouth,
anal, reproductive holes etc. Therefore for the purpose of treatment, we have to consider the
Dravya, gunn & karm of Akash which have been tabulated at proper place.

Vayu- y\ Tour.

Dyanamic state of cosmic systems & the stages of the evolution & change is the law of nature.
All are the outcome on account of Vayu mahabhoot. Therefore vayu mahabhoot is in the
background of all activities. Had it not been there, any action could not be perceived. Due to
this vayu, there is vibration in nature as well as in human body, which is responsible for life. In
nature, from the stage of sprouting of a seed to the retention and growth of child in mothers
womb, all creativity is possible only by vayu. All kinds of activities either physical or mental are
possible by vayu. Vayu appears at one place as a cool, slow breeze promoting healthy life in all
but again in the other form it causes destruction when imbalanced in the form of storms,
cyclones or causing earthquakes. In this known body, vayu is responsible for each breadth of
life. The beating of heart regularly and the availability of rhythmic pulse is all due to vayu. Vayu
is only responsible for the mobility and live lines of the entire world.

Agni- Ship, L-Llow -

In nature we have often observed that some substances change their forms from one to an-
other. This transformation is brought about in nature due to the presence of Agni element. If
water comes in contact with Agni, it gets transformed into vapours. Such transformations of

[19]
