any substance between solid, liquid or gas states is brought about by Agni. In our human bedy
also, Agni is present in various forms. We daily take food which is continuously being con-
verted into useful substances at appropriate time and this is brought about by the Agni inside
the human body. The maintainance of a continuous body temperature is also indicative of
Agni element within the body. The glow and radiance on our faces are also a manifestation of
the Agni element of our body. The basic attribute of Agni is to burn. Due to this very burning
attribute, it detoxifies all impurities and hence a substance retains its original form. We all
know that such a similar process is applied i.e. “gold is burnt to make it pure.”

dal- TASTE:

In the universe, in comparison to other elements, expanse of Jal or water element is more than that of
other elements. In human body also, the proportion of Jal is more (60-70%) than that of other ele-
ments. In nature Jal is the basis of all life. To restore balance with the buming attribute of Agni, the
cooling effect of Jal is required, which is its basic attribute. Jal causes things to combine together. Even
the hardest substances could be joined by this cohesion property of water. Have you ever thought of
that without this joining attribute of Jal, could the cement, sand etc. join together and a building be
created? Practically this binding property of water causes them to join and create a beautiful building.
In our body the various fluids are representing this Jal element. In life the liking to live is transmitted
through this Jal only. In lack of water element, the life becomes dry. In life the progress of attributes like
love, affection, softness etc is all due to water. Agni and Jal establish a beautiful balance not only in
cradle of growth of life but also in our human body, due to this the proper co-ordination and mainte-
nance of nature and life is made possible. Vayu creates activity. Agni brings about change in every-
thing. It gives texture & colour. Water nourishes them. Therefore, the trio of Vayu, Agni & Jal are
known as the more fundamental & creative in nature, amongst five elements and in our scriptures,
these three make the primordial basis of existence of cosmos. In fact, the cosmos has infinite compo-
nents; out of infinity, finity to the extent of three primordial elements, five mahabhoot and lastly upto
ten dravyas are considered to be sufficient modalities to study the infinite world. This is again the
another basic fundamental of Ayurvedic concept to gather knowledge about the life and all the sci-
ences may have as such, their origins in it In one sentence, all sciences are the sprouts of it

Ayurveda is universal & infinite in its nature, so it covers all; imespective of the place, caste,
creed & religion & anything and it formulates the principle of harmonization of one end to
other of the globe & the concept of “Vasudhev Kutumbakam” i.e. the entire globe is one family
and has shelter under one common sky and upbringing on the same earth. Therefore by the
concept of likelihood, Akash provides shelter & all civilizations are upbringing on the bosom of
the earth. Therefore both can be termed as the parents and rest of the three primordial ele-
ments as Vayu, Agni, Jal (Water) are interacting & interplaying inbetween them & they conssti-
tute the continual process of the life. And these forces keep on interacting & when this interac-
tion or this harmonization breaks, that ends the life itself, that is the doom’s day (pralay).

Prithvi-
Prithvi is thovradle of and is the foundation and base. As the Akash provides protection in the
{20}
