form of a covering from top so the prithvi provides the protection from bottom by becoming the
basis of cosmos. For all of us, prithvi represents that mother in whose lap we all have played
and grown up and who has brought up us in the most comfortable manner. Among all the
mahabhoot/elements, prithvi element is the last, so it includes the attributes of all the preceding
elements. The chief attributes of prithvi are to hold, stability and heaviness. Where vayu ap-
pears as innocent and full of activity, the prithvi appears as stable and still. In our body the
bones represent the prithvi elements and they provide a foundation and stability to the human
body. The heaviness of body also indicates towards the prithvi form existing in the human
body.

We have learnt to identify the five mahabhoot in the cosmos and human body. The question
arises that how do we come to know about these elements? As we try to know a person or
object by its attributes, now again another question arises here that how these attributes are
known i.e. through which medium are they received? So, the indriyas or senses of human
body are said to be responsible for receiving these attributes. So the attributes are said to be as
receivable by the senses or rather perceived by senses.

In our body the indriyas are of two types-
1- Gyanendriyas (sense organs)
2- Karmendriyas (action organs)
Gyanendriyas are classified as five in number as- ears, skin, eyes, nose and tongue.
Karmendriyas are also five -arms, legs, mouth, reproductive organ and excretory organ or
anus.

Earlier we have seen that in each mahaboot there is a specific bhoot or energy within it. The
energy of Akash is sound, vayu is touch, Agni is radiance, Jal is taste and Prithvi is smell. To
have the knowledge of these energies within the mahabhoot and to perceive them. we have
five gyanendriyas or sense organs. We receive the knowledge of sound by ears, of touch by
skin, of radiance by eyes, of taste by tongue and of smell by nose. Thus to receive and perceive
the attributes and energies of these Mahabhoot the human body has five separate gyanendriyas,
each of which interacts with each of the five Mahabhoot or elements.

By the help of karmendriyas, we carry on our day to day activities. Our arms carry out various
activities as required by body; legs perform the work of walking, mouth receives the food,
reproductive organ does the work of giving child birth by which the creation is carried on and
the anus performs the work of excretion of wastes.

Gyanendriyas and Karmendriyas help us to be in communion with this five element world and
because of them a co-ordinated working of natural processes is carried on. The question
arises as on whose direction this gyanendriya and karmendriya work? Who is their controller?
Practically the life force or bio- energy which has been termed atma (soul) present in the body
is the actual director and controller of our indriyas (senses). Atma carries out its work through
mann (mind) which thereby controls and puts the indriyas into action.

[21]
