Chapter 4

Five dimensions of Metaphysical Elements -
‘Servam dravyam panch bhoutikam’..: (all elements have in them five element structure)
“Wap desha utkarshen’ ...........600c000 (their utility is for specific purposes)

During our study of five mahabhoot elements we observe that in the cosmos along with the
physical existence there is also a metaphysical existence. Our human body is a unique ex-
ample of a wonderful union between physical and metaphysical existence. As the physical
world is created by the combination of Akash, Vayu, Agni, Jal and Prithvi, similarly the meta-
physical world is created by the five metaphysical elements. As a result of this physical and
metaphysical entitu existing toaether. multinle manifestations of nature in this livina gnd non-
 1iving woria, come into existence. In fact the physical and meta physical are inseparable and in
the absence of one the existence of the other can not be thought of. The things which are so
called non-living, also have in some or the other smallest form the existence of life force in
them.

Now let us see which are the 5 dimensions of metaphysical existence. These 5 dimensions are
named as below.

a.Kaal (Time) Nevve System: Sonilvls ten i Sua
b. Disha (Direction) Kha is Speak. PRACT LCE.

c. Mann (Mind)
d. Atma (Soul)

e. Tam (Origin)
a) Kaal-

In day to day life we experience that every event occurs in some or the other time. The exist-
ence of any object or entity appears in a particular time. Every object or living body in the
world has its own definite time period after which it automatically loses it’s identity or dies.

A person is bom and after a definite time period he looses his identity by death. Any flower
which blossoms today gets destroyed after 2 or 3 days. Similarly all the factors in nature are
diminished by the hands of time i.e. they lose their identity.

Ayurveda depicts Kaal (time factor) as dravya just like any other element. It is valuable and
important component of cosmos because it governs all human activity. It is not concrete ele-
ment. Therefore falls in category of metaphysical element. Life process is manifested by child-
hood, adolescence, adulthood, old age etc. All these stages of life is due to time which is the
ground of growth of human body in terms of physical and mental body. In our daily life also
time is always there with us in the form of childhood, adolescence, adulthood, old age, sleep-

[22]
