Farly dim Rhehir Diablx . - dalrenl deediin”

Dohrn)

ing time, time to eat, time to study, morning time, evening time, day, hour, minute, second etc.
Practically we cannot come out from this concept of time. This is such an important element
which controls and regulates our complete life.

b) Disha-

This world is meant to be always in continuity. Any object or person going from one place to
the other is possible because of this continuous activity going on in the world. Some practical
examples of transmissions are the flow of water in rivers, the growing of trees and plants and
free roaming of birds in the sky. The question here is that what is the basis of this continuity?
Practically in the absence of the sense of direction, there is no possibility of any activity. When-
ever we are movable, we move in some or the other direction. The plants and trees also have
a definite direction of growth. The water in the rivers also flow in a definite direction. If we
study the various activities in our body, we find that all the activities are regulated by the help
of a definite direction. After eating food it moves on in a definite direction. In the whole body
the flow of blood from heart also has its fixed direction. Along with the physical activities, our
mental activities, thoughts, analysis all have a definite direction. Thus it is clear that in the
cosmos and human body any action or activity is not possible without direction. Disha is an
important element to control and determine all the activities of life as well as in nature. Ayurveda
has treated ‘Disha’ as a dravya. It means direction. It is also a component of life process,
which is in dynamic state and it occurs in a chain of sequence of events.

This chain of sequence X\
at Macro level Begining o—— 0—— 0—— 0
| fom - Lok) Satyug Treta Dwapar Kalyug
at Micro level ~
(Human body - Purush) Embryo Childhood Adolescence > Aaulthesd sy
Death « Old age

Both above sequence of life process involves time factor and with direction, which looks to be
linear but actually when we start from the place and again we reach the same place. It means
it is not linear but after traversing any span of life or distance we reach at the same place. It
clearly shows the circular in shape and effect both. Navigation of earth also shows the circular
shape of the earth and it is confirmed by geographers also.

In respect of Acupressure concept of Disha as dravya it has been numbered as (7) and meta-
physical in nature and has parallel in motor nerves in central nervous system. We can have
parallels in our day to day life. Notorious child in the family is termed as going in wrong
direction or spoiled child. Also any child has lust for food other than cooked at home and such
other examples are called misdirected and needs treatment. This dravya no. 7 can be used to

(23)
