correct such metaphysical occult diseases by virtue of acupressure by considering Ayurvedic
concept.

c)Mann- fv acbin. Gin & Cravm.

Who does not know the glory of Mann ? We continuously experience the existence of Mann as
the experience behind all physical activity. By the immense power of mind we can roam about
with enormous speed throughout the world by just sitting at one place. The medium to make
active all our gyanendrias and karmendriyas is through the mind. The fundamental basis of
energy in the human body i.e. the soul controls all the physical activities through the mind. Mann

Rul gimakes both the gyanendriyas and karmendriyas active hence its nature is said to be dual.
So
ay

R

Usually all our senses are eager to be active for work but at one moment only one sense
(indriya) is active because of mann. Mann when is in union with a particular indriya at a
particular time, then that particular indriya is only active. It is clear that mann is the sole
responsible element for all our physical and mental activities. *

d) Atma-

Soul is the universal metaphysical entity about which we often hear through religious and
spiritual saints. Here we are analysing atma as a dravya (element). About the atma we come
to know as indications from day to day interactions. Often we come across the terms and
phrase “My soul is about to burst by your misdeeds. My soul feels gratified by your noble
deeds.” Actually atma is the residing life force in the body. The entire activities and behaviours
of our body are directed and controlled by it. This is that center point or source through which
the whole body receives energy. Hence all the living experiences of the body(live events) are
expressed through it. The prana, energy or chetna of this physical body is entirely dependent
on this metaphysical activity. Atma only controls this whole body. By the help of various sense
organs, this atma establishes harmony between the cosmos and human body. By the help of
various karmendriyas, atma controls the whole body and promotes it for all activities. Atma is
the residing force behind the whole mental framework, analysis, thought process, experiences
etc. and in this manner it is the center point of all physical activities.

That is feeling of pleasure and agony at deep core levels, self satisfaction, self explanation, self
realization, inner conscience are all manifestations of invisible force residing deep inside but
for all outward manifestations and activities. Most potent force i.e. soul or chetana is being
used as number nine (9) in acupressure in view of vedic concept. Its physical form is so much
so micro and subtle, we are compelled to call it “invisible” and form less but virtually it’s form
is very subtle beyond one’s imagination and perception. This is divine concept, divine in
nature and effect. That is why it is very powerful when treated by life force itself. In basic level
this is more than sufficient to deal with.

e) Tam-

The meaning of the word tam is darkness. As in the darkness the existence of all the cosmic
entities is hidden, all the objects are engrossed in this darkness, similarly after ‘pralay’

[24]
