Puns— C¥ Cah Nwveow Comey mr,

Chapter 5
How to treat human body by Atma?

In the previous chapter, we have found that the atma controls and regulates all the indriyas by
the help of Mann, and the energy of this physical body is dependent on this metaphysical
entity. Actually the residence of this life force is brain in the nuclear area of which|lives the soul.
It is omnipresent in all the particles of the body in the form of metaphysical binding fibres. This
entire network of chetna has been termed by scientists as the central nervous system.

This above fact is also verified by the fundamental principle of Ayurvedic tulyarthta between
the cosmos and body as that of manifested and unmanifested worlds. The various compo-
nents of cosmos as planets, satellites, meteors, mountains, oceans, rivers, pools, villages, foun-
tains, streams, wells, plants, trees, crawlers and creepers, flower, leaves, humans, birds, ani-
mals, insects etc. are the manifestations of all kinds of living and non-living components which
being dual in nature are closely related to each other. All these manifestations appear as living
and non-living as two forms of life force and represent the whole cosmos as a cosmic network.

Similarly every cell of human body is joined to the central nervous system. This nervous system
is similar to the network of cosmic energy. All the activities happening in the cosmos and its
related structures, both are inseparable. In this manner, the manifested and unmanifested are
inseparable.

In Ayurved, the form or structure is termed as Adhikaran or residence. Whereas the chetna or
life force has been termed as Atma (soul), the power as the attributes, the activities of an
element as karma (action) and the result by them as karmphal (resultant). Its complete resem-
blance can be established with the scientific principles as follows-

1- Energy is the power of doing work.

2- Every action has an equal and opposite reaction.
The result of every activity is the resultant called karmphal . Practically the plant grown up by
a seed has its utility, based on the fruit it bears. Even if a seed is sown and it attains the

structure of a tree, without the development of flower or seed, the creativity is not complete i.e.
its utility is not known.

In the form of human birth also, there are two purposes of life-

1- Contribute in the growth of this cosmos.
2- Utility/usefulness of each living creature.

We will be able to attain bliss on being born as a human among all the 84 lakh of species when
we will be able to contribute in the creation process of almighty and we as a living creature
have some usefulness.

Acupressure is such a therapy which helps the humans to know the goal behind the usefulness
of one’s birth and helps to attain that goal as to why we are here. Acupressure is a service to

(27]
