mankind which not only provides life force to all but also a person adopting this therapy

becomes successful in performing the above two duties. By tha, hela gUhindharerapsraduivne

” factor within each human becomes active and the diseased ¢ energy which makes a person
dead like or inactive is removed.

On hearing the above statements, one may not trust but on applying to oneself, one can prac-
tically experience it. To experience is the power of almighty and the person who experiences is
called lively or chaitanya. Thus we say that the one who has the power to experience is lively
or living else dead. An animated soul is one who has sensitivity otherwise anyone who does
not have sensitivity is senseless.

On the basis of above analysis, the definition of Acupressure can be established as follows-

“On pressing a point as small/subtle by the tip of a needle, one can activate the divine force
residing in every smallest particle of human body and activating this infinite life force and its
transmission to all related cells is called Acupressure.”

By using various other means of treatment (as needle, seed, bipolar magnets, colours, etc.)
removing all diseased energy by this divine power is also named (based on the instruments
applied for treatment) as Acupressure, Acupuncture, magnet therapy, seed therapy, colour
therapy and such other names.

It is clear that in this treatment system, the following principles are included-

1- In this treatment the medicine is that divine power/energy which is a part of almighty
god in humans, called as chetna, atma or life force.

2- Being based on the divine powers, acupressure is thus an extremely powerful and
effective treatment therapy. Its impact is expanded to the infinity, similar to the infinite
expanse of divinity.

3- Its effect is extremely instantaneous.

4- Life and death are not in the hands of any common or extra- ordinary person but its
only causative factor is the Almighty. The therapist having no control and right over it,
is neither responsible for the death of a patient nor giving a new life to them. Living as
long as we ordained, we should live a pleasant life. This is the message of this power.

5- This treatment method is completely without side effects.

Thus it has been made clear that by the help of the power of God, Atma (soul), the treatment
of this human body can be carried on in a very simple & successful mannar..

(28)
