Chapter 6
Vata, Pitta, Kapha

Earlier we have seen that there is a definite rule/sequence of these five mahabhoot i.e. every
next element includes the attributes of the previous element.

Along with this relation there exists another relation between them according to ayurved, on
the basis of which there is a balance between the elements. This interrelation of one element
with its nearest element is the basis by which they help each other and establish harmony.

Practically every element exists in isolation but without the union with other elements it is not
possible to prolong creativity. Therefore on this earth and the human body, these mahabhoot
are manifested in combined form. For example in our body the blood exists in liquid form but
practically it has 65 % fluid part and 45% solid part in the form of cells. It is clear that blood is
not an isolated element but a combined substance in which liquid and solid both are included.
The two paired controlling elements and their specific names are as follows:
A. Akash + Vayu = Vata par — dbedee BEA Mamita Stads 0 Palin
B. Agni + Jal Pitta 3+h

C. Jal + Prithvi = Kapha H+

The above each pair of mahabhoot help each other and provide great force to human
body by establishing balance and in case of imbalance one element is increased and the
other decreased and thereby balance can be established. | _ pide ys

A) Vata (Akash + Vayu) - 0\- y;54” movers

The element Akash is established in the nature as an expansive and universal element. Its
extension is maximum but its activity is minimum. The nearest element to Akash i.e. Vayu has
maximum activity which is opposite to the nature of Akash. Practically Vayu is known for its
activity and as a working force. In human body when there is a harmony between the Akash
element and Vayu element then they help in the growth and development of the body. On the
contrary when the required harmony is not there then any one element becomes excess and
the other element is deficient and the body becomes unhealthy. To make balance between
them one element is decreased and the other is increased.

B) Pitta (Agni + Jal) - Foy: yor?

In the nature Agni and Jal are accepted as two opposite elements. To control the burning
nature of Agni, accordingly Jal is required. On the other hand to reduce the basic attribute of
dal i.e. coldness, the help of Agni is required. In human body also Agni and Jal balance each
other. Balanced Agni and Jal provide force to the body and if any of them is excess or deficient
there is a state of imbalance and the body gets diseased. This diseased state due to the imbal-
ance of Agni and Jal can be again harmonised by decreasing the excess element and increas-
ing the deficient element.

29]
