Qi Classification

UB 47
UB 48

UB 66
K7
K25
K 27

P6°

P7
Tw3

Tw4

Twé

Tw 10
GB9

GB 12
GB 14
GB 21
GB 25
GB 30
GB 34

It tonifies kidneys & strengthens mental state “elating to kidneys. It strength.
ens will power & determination.

It ensures the smooth spreading of triple warmer qi downwards to uterus.
genitals & urinary stem ie lower warmer.

It rectifies the qi of the five internal yin organs.
It protects the defensive qi. It secures the kidney qi.
It is an important point for asthama due to kidney not receiving qi.

It stimulates kidney function of reception of qi. It subduces rebellious qi.
This is an important point for asthama & cough due to kidney deficiency.

It regulates heart gi & blood it treats discomforts or pain in chest due to
stagnation of qi & blood.

It regulates heart qi. It downbears turbid qi.

It regulates qi & removes liver qi stagnation causing hypochondiac pain. It
moves qi and lifts depression caused by liver qi stagnation.

It tonifies original qi. Treat this point in all chronic disease, when the kid-
neys have become deficient and the person's energy is greatly weakned
the original qi arises between the kidneys and spreads to the internal or-
gans via the tripple warmer. this point does this work. Hence, it is called the
source point of the source points of all the of organs of the body.

It regulate qi in the three warmers and removes stagnation of liver qi.
ured dor 4 org ad et ot TW6 va GB 34 we Boa 2

It relives liver qi stagnation and cures depression & mood swings causes
by such stagnation.

It subdues the rising liver yang, liver fire or liver wind and conducts it down-
ward. Thus it treats migraine headaches.

It subdues rising qi & treats migraine headache.

It subues rising qi & cures unilateral frontal headache.

It disinhibits the gall bladder & downbears the counterflow qi.

It protects the defensive qi. It secures the kidney qi.

It stimulates the circulaton of qi and blood to the whole leg.

It moves qi & abducts (#7 @ 4X a TMM) stagnation, down bears the

contravection qi of the liver and gall bladder.
