Chapter 22

Blood Classification

Lug

Li 10
Litt

Li16
St29

St 30
St 32

St 36

St 39
Sp1

It promotes the circulation of blood & influences the pulse & all blood ves-
sels. One can feel the movement of qi within the blood at this point. Use this
point in poor circulation, cold hands & feet, 'chilblains & varicose veins etc.

It is powerful tonic for increasing blood. ga" blood tonic wet wren & |

It regulates, moves & quickens the blood, it cools the blood and cures skin
diseases, like urticaria, psorasis, eczema due to heat in blood. It expels
external wind heat with fever, it also exels internal heat with fever, it also
resolves damp heat causing skin erruptions, cystitis or urethritis.

It moves blood locally

It relieves stagnation of blood in the uterus & regulates the menses & thus
treats dysmenorrhea with dark - clotted blood and amenorrhoea due to sta-
sis of blood.

It regulates blood in lower abdomen & genitalia.

It expels wind heat affecting the blood & can be used to treat certain skin
diseases due to wind heat in the blood ie, an acute urticaria.

It supplement & quickens the blood, clears and rectifies the blood.

It is a powerful tonic to increase blood in the body.

It is a point of the sea of blood and it can be used to tonify blood.

It quickens blood & stops bleeding, regulates menstruation. It regulates stasis
of blood in uterus. It stops bleeding from nose, stomach, urinary bladder,
uterus, intestines etc. It stops bleeding by strengthening the spleen function
of holding blood.

~ Stasis of blood causes mental restlessness & depression and a treatment

Sp4

on this point cures this and calms the mind and stops excess dreaming.

It stops excess bleeding during menstruation, by improving the spleen’s
function of holding bold.

It frees the flow of channel, moves the blood, nourishes yin and supple-
ments the blood. It stops bleeding anywhere is the body including blood in
stool. It removes stasis of blood in uterus.causing dysmenorrhea with clotted
blood. It tonifies qi & blood to relieve chronic tiredness.

