UB2

UB10

UB17

UB 54

UB 57

UB 58

UB 59

UB 60

UB 62
UB 65
P4

Tw2
Tw 4
Ws

Tw6
TW7
Tw 8

glands, parotitis & tonsilitis.

It removes painful obstruction from the urinary bladder meridian and treats
facial paralysis, facial tics & trigeminal neuralgia.

It removes obstruction from the channel & treats cervical spondilitis & lower
back pain.

It removes obstruction from diaphragm and chest and in used for pain in
chest, belching, hiccup & fullness in epigastrium.

It removes obstruction from urinary bladder meridian and thus treats bilat-
eral or unilateral lower back pain but not on midline (i.e. on spine itself)

It removes obstructions from the urinary bladder meridian and treats lower
backache and sciatica, piles & cramps in calves.

it removes obstructions from urinary bladder meridian and treats lower back-
ache & sciatica. Wa sciatica @ 4x % ad urinary bladder and gall bladder
meridians & aa 4 @, al ve fg aga sear or ATT BI

It removes obstruction from urinary bladder meridian and treats unilateral
backache. 34 fry w UTE oy S 8 G1 muscles H wife Pet & cen We
OB Fe ara B Ga B1

It removes painful obstruction syndromes of shoulder, neck and head. It
also treats chronic backache.

It removes painful obstruction syndrome and treats chronic lower backache.
It is used for painful obstruction syndrome of neck.

It removes obstructions from pericardium meridian and cures arrhythmia
and palpitations & chest pain.

use this point for painful obstruction syndrome of finger.

It removes painful obstruction syndrome of the arm & shoulder.

This is a major point for the treatment of painful obstruction syndrome of the
arm, shoulder & neck. eR 4 wel aa stawag eae ed St a ae Vad BIER
or oera fag 81

It treats painful obstruction syndrome of flanks.

It removes painful obstruction from ears, temples and eyebrows

This is an important point for painful obstruction in arm, neck, shoulders
and occipit. It is more effective when pain is in more than one yang merid-
ian of arm & shoulder. It relaxes the muscles & relieves pain & stiffness.

176
