————n,
( Depression |

Major depression qéq Hae : |t is a mental disorder characterised by the

occurence of one or more major depressive episodes and the absence of any

history of manic or hypomanic episodes.

Reactive depression uff saree : This depression is due to some

intensity, sad external situation and is relieved, when that situation is removed.

This is also called situational depression.

Melancholic Depression fasta sifa aia@eia : This is caused by depressed

and unhappy emotional state with abnormal inhibition of mental and bodily

activity. Melancholic depression may be of two types.

a) Agitated melancholic depression 3&4 OH aren fastasifid Sae : Itis a
form with constant motion and signs of great emotional excitement.

b) __Involutional melancholic depression Wearadat aren fase afc siaeie : It is
an affective disorder occurring in late middle life, with agitation, worry,
anxiety, somatic preoccupations, insomnia and sometimes paranoid

reactions Weeaitia wfafietl
Manic Depression 34aa Hae : Manic depression is alternating between
attacks of mania and depression. It is bipolar disorder. faset faoet @t gjaci vet #
mania vd Ger vet H depression et sat f1 SMaex HaMeaha HH BATE
gfefar sraraear ed SAAR sera <faaR wt Sa Fl GRA HT AA OK Hae STAT Ha
Uget #1 Mania ar Wit gia Sr sneer GX Boa & aM depression wr Wit
waren & fet! Ft WHR mania or Wit Baa S va depression a Wit xfaae
Bl HEA SX Tea al
Senile psychotic depression G@IaWI G HAE : It is senile dementia (at
@I FM) with depressive or paranoid (we sii) delusions (Frat wT) or
hallucinations (ae4)|
Hallucination (aé4) means a false perception or image about sight, sound, smell,
taste or touch.
Unipolar Depressions : In unipolar depression there is attack of depression
only. There is never any attack of mania.

Apart from the above mentioned types of depressions, there may be seasonal
depression, premenstrual depression, post partum depression, prenatal
depression and temporary depression.

C

A Treatise on (207
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture- - Part 9 - Psychosomatic & Skin Diseases \,

