@ Ballistic Trauma — Caused by a projectile weapon such as a
firearm. This may include two external wounds (entry and exit) and a
contiguous wound between the two.

The pattern of injury, evaluation and treatment will vary with the
mechanism of the injury. Blunt tauma causes injury via a shock effect;
delivering energy over an area. Wounds are often not straight and
unbroken skin may hide significant injury. Penetrating trauma follows
the course of the injurious device. As the energy is applied in a more
focused fashion, it requires less energy to cause significant injury. Any
body organ, including bone and brain, can be injured and bleed. Bleeding
may not be readily apparent; internal organs such as the liver, kidney
and spleen may bleed into the abdominal cavity. The only apparent signs
may come with blood loss. Bleeding from a bodily orifice, such as the
rectum, nose or ears may signal internal bleeding, but cannot be relied
upon. Bleeding from a medical procedure also falls into this category.
Medical Condition :

‘Medical Bleeding’ denotes Haemorrhage as a result of an underlying
medical condition (i.e. causes of bleeding that are not directly due to
trauma). Blood can escape from blood vessels as a result of 3 basic
patterns of injury :

@ = Intravascular Changes - Changes of the blood within
vessels (e. g. T blood pressure, ¥ clotting factors).

@ = Intramural Changes - Changes arising within the
walls of blood vessels (e.g. aneurysms, dissections, AVMs, vasculitides).
@ = Extravascular Changes - Changes arising outside
blood vessels (e.g. H pylori infection, brain abscess, brain tumour).

The discussion here is limited to the common practical aspects of
blood clot formation which manifest as bleeding

Certain medical conditions can also make patients susceptible to
bleeding. These are conditions that affect the normal “Hemostatic’”
functions of the body. Hemostasis involves several components. The
main components of the hemostatic system include platelets and the
coagulation system.

Platelets are small blood components that form a plug in the blood
