Introduction

vill) Fat Degeneration Vessel Treats Fat Tissue
(Fat D Meridian)

ix) Eye Orbit Meridian Treats Eye diseases
(Eye Meridian)

In above stated nine meridians first eight meridians start from the fingers of hand-feet

but the ninth meridian (Eye Orbit Meridian) is located around the orbit of the eye.

The importance and utility of all these nine meridians, their pathways and points located

on those meridians, are further described in the book.

2.

Kidney Meridian :

According to Chinese Acupuncture this meridian starts from K-1 on the sole of the
foot. According to E. A. V. Kidney meridian starts from inner side of the nail of the
smallest toe (Vth toe) of the foot. From here it goes through chinese K 1 in the sole of
the foot. In E. A. V. the points on this meridian are also different till ankle. According to
E.A. V., Chinese point K-1 is deep lymph point of kidney.

The points of Urinary Bladder Meridian on lumbar and back of thigh are also different,
inE.A.V.

Tripple Warmer Meridian is known as endocrine meridian in E. A. V. Treatment for
the malfunctions of all endocrinal glands can be given on this meridian.

Pericardium Meridian is known as circulation meridian in E. A. V. All the points related
to the arteries, veins, lymph system etc. of circulatory system in the body are given on
this meridian.

According to E. A. V. Spleen Meridian is only on the left side of the body. This meridian
is used for the treatment of the chemistry of blood. Important points related to white
blood cells, red blood cells, lymphocytes etc. in blood are located on this meridian.
In E. A. V. the right side of the spleen meridian is called as Pancreas Meridian.
Treatment for diabetes, gout, fat metabolism, albumin etc. are given on this meridian.
Eye Orbit Meridian is used for the treatment of various parts of eyes like Retina,
Macula, Cornea, Sclera, Choroid, Viterous Body, Ciliary Body, Iris, Tear Gland,
Conjunctiva etc. All the three cranial Motor nerves of eye (Trochlear Nerve, Oculomotor
Nerve, and Abducens Nerve) can be treated on this meridian.

<>)
