Introduction

Dr. R. Voll has prepared treatment protocols for the various diseases of eye by Electro
Acupuncture. With the help of these treatment guides and protocols, treatment of
irretrievable diseases of eye is also possible.

According to Dr. Voll disease in any part of the eye is related to the problem in the
internal organ of the body. Therefore, at the time of treating eye one must treat the
related internal organ also. For example, if vision impairment happens because of
yellow spot in Macula, then it is the resultant of low absorption capacity of oxygen in
Lungs. The person inherits the right lung from father and left lung from mother. If father
is a smoker, son can have problem in the macula of the right eye. Father can also be
a reason for the Tuberclosis (T.B.) of the right lung in son. At the time of treatment
therapist should consider the history of the diseases of father-mother also. In the
same way the treatment protocols for the different parts of the eye are discussed in
the book further.
On the Chinese Twelve Meridians and Eight New Tissue Meridians following extra and
special points are discovered. Treatment on those points could also effectively cure
the malfunctions of the internal organs. We believe that the discoveries of Dr. Voll
would become a mile-stone in the Acupuncture treatment :
a) C.M.P. (Control Measurement Point) :
This point gives the information about the pathological disturbances in the internal
part of the body or the organ at large itself. For example, if there is any irregularity
in the shape, size, structure of the heart or irregularity in the funtioning of heart the
first treatment should be given on CMP of Heart.
It is being observed that only treatment on the control measurement point cures
the problem and malfunctioning of the organ amazingly and restores the balance
of the functionality of that organ.
b) i) R.P. (Reference Point)
This point gives the information about the functional disturbance of that organ.
For example, in the case of the problem in tooth one should give treatment
on Ly 2 (R. P. of Tooth) first.

i)
