Chapter

Gall Stones

What are Gall Stones ?

Gall stones are usually composed mainly of cholestrol that has crystallised from bile.

Gall stones usually form in the gall bladder and may lodge in the cystic duct, the

common bile duct or the pancreatic duct.

Gall stones are collections of solid crystals in the gall bladder or in the bile ducts.

When the stones are in the gall bladder, the condition is called cholelethiasis.

When stones are in the bile ducts, the condition is called choledocholithiasis.

Gall Bladder stones mostly solid crystals of tri-glycerides. Cholestrol is not soluble in
water but it is soluble in the bile. When cholestrol in the bile is over saturated then it stays in
the bile in insoluble condition and starts forming crystals. These crystals are later forms
stones.

Some stones of Gall Bladder are made up of calcium salts and bilirubin. Bilirubin is the
main pigment in the bile. These are called pigmented stones.

Sometimes stones comes out in the bile duct from the Gall Bladder. Some stones are
formed in the bile duct itself. infection or inflammation in bile duct also forms stones. These
stones are form bilirubin, Stones create obstruction in the bile duct and results as
inflammation and bacterial infection. This creates stricture or narrowing of bile duct. This
narrowing obstructs the flow of bile even stones are removed.

Symptoms of gall bladder stones :

1) Many Gall Bladder stones are stay in Gall Bladder without giving any problem.

2) Stones more to bile ducts from the Gall Bladder. If it is small stone so it easily

moves to Small Intestine with the flow of a bile. From Small Intestine to Large
Intestine and then excreats with stool. But when this stone stays is bile duct then
it obstructs the flow of bile then patient feels pain at that place and nausea or
vomiting starts. Obstruction starts formation of the bacteria and infection in bile
duct occurs.

3) Sometimes this results as Liver abcess.

A Treatise on (279)
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 15 - English

