Chapter

Travelling of Gastro Intestinal Tract

From the ancient time scholar of Acupuncture got expertised to treat human body by
almost all the diseases. They prepared many protocols also those protocols were made
different sign and symptoms of disease on the basis of hte experience. Still today these
protocols are used in the treatment and people are getting relief alot.

Chinese scholar also needed this old acupuncture treatment’s cure knowledge,
it is very necessary and important to be known by Chinese scholars. It is produced in
this book.

Dr. Wang Le-ting is founder of this Chinese Acupuncture. He had researched on
Traditional Chinese Acupuncture treatment protocols and revised protocols are presented
which is very much successful. A very old scholar Dr. Master Tong researched on old
protocols of Acupuncture and presented according to the modem scenario after modifying.
Dr. Cheng Danan also presented the formula’s and protocols of Moxibstaion Acupuncture.
Which is very effective and succesful. Now a days also continuous research is going on
Acupuncture. After neading those literature and experimental basis treatment and the results
some useful and successful results those protocols are included in this book.

After reading there protocols and after using successfully these protocols are
the true gratitude and homage to the Chinse scholars. This books has not been written for
profit but to spread this divine knowledge to each and every human. Thatis the purpose of
this book.

In China itis assumed that disease are three types :

1. Prenatal diseases

2. Postnatal diseases

3. Traumatic diseases

Gastrointestinal problems are post natal diseases. Roo: of post natal Qiis spleen &
stomach. The spleen & stomach produce food qi from the food we eat. The digestive tract
includes spleen, stomach, small intestine and large intestine. This is called gastro-
intestinal tract. Disturbance in this gastro-intestinal tract food Qi and post natal Qi could not
prepared properly and person feels weak.

(94 ) A Treatise on
. Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 15 - English

