Stomach, CV 12 plays a very important point for the digestion of food, That's the reason any
kind of disturbance in digestion CV in used in China. CV 12 digests the food and makes
fundus and sends the fort to pylorus from the body of Stomach.

Meeting point is the point where life essence Qi get accumulated and meet. Life force
is depends on life essence Qi. Li, Si, CV and stomach all gets life essence Qi by CV 12 and
improves the functions.

CV 19 regulate anruertifies the function of Qiin L. SAMWics..iddle warmer. This improves
vomiting, nausea, hiccup due to contravection of food and keep the track of food to move in
the proper path. CV 12is alarm point of Stomach.

St 36 is he - sea point of stomach. This treats hundreds of disease including all type of
affection of stomach and spleen. It tonifies the spleen and requlates th stomach. It treats
diseases of the six bowels. "For hundred of diseases do not forget St 36".

Dr. Wang Lu - Ting

Sea is a place where hundred of rivers join. ST 36 is a sea point six bowels
i.e. stomach, large intestine, small intestine, gall bladder, urinary bladder and triple warmer
- Any problem in these organs then do not forget to treat St 36. It Esophagus, stomach,
small intestine and large intestine any where contravection of food or Qican be restored by
St36.

CV 12 and St 36 together are ruling points of gastro intestinal tract. These two points
together almost many disturbances can be removed and restore. So if therapist finds any
disturbance in pathway of digestion he must treat CV 12, St 36 and GV 13.

CV 13 - Upper door of stomach is this also called. This point controls the door of
esophagus and stomach for food and liquid. So when food get obstruction in esophagus
and does not move towards stomac h then CV 13 opens the doors of stomach so ford and
liquid reaches these.

CV 10 - This is called the lower door of Stomach. The digested food reaches to
duodenum the part of small intestine through pylorus. CV 10, warms and frees the flow of
the stomach and intestine. It boosts the Qi and corrects and counter flow.

CV6- Thisis called sea of Qi. When Qi starts sinking then patient suffers from hernia,
piles, varicose veins, gastroptosis. At this moment it needed Qi to tone and raise. This work
is done by CV 6 and CV12. These points can be done moxa treatment on CV 6 excites
original Qi and energy flow again restores.

96 ) A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 15 - English

