Over eating obstructs stomach Qi and weakens spleen leading to headaches on the
forehead which are sharp in nature.

Hot energy foods such as spices, curries, red chillies, black pepper or white pepper,
red meat, alcohol, tobacco etc. cause stomach heat or liver fire. Liver fire causes
sharp lateral headaches and stomach heat causes sharp frontal headaches.
Excess consumption of damp producing foods produces dampness in spleen which
causes dull headaches on the forehead with a feeling of heaviness in the head. Damp
producing foods include : fried foods, greasy foods, milk & milk products like cheese,
butter, ghee, cream, icecream etc. and bananas, peanuts, sweets and white sugar.
Too much salt in the diet causes a deficiency of kidneys producing dull headaches in
the whole head or on the occiput.

Excessive consumption of sour foods affects the liver and causes headaches.
Eating very quickly or discussing work while eating causes retention of food in the
stomach and produces sharp headaches on the forehead.

Eating irregularly or too late at night causes a deficiency of stomach yin & produces
dull headaches on the forehead

An excessive consumption of coffee is a frequent cause of chronic headaches. Chronic
headache sufferer always benefits greatly by not drinking coffee at all.

Accidents gdeare :

Severe accidents and falls injuring head can cause stasis of blood in a particular area
of the head. This is a frequent cause of chronic headache. In such cases the head-
ache always occurs on the same part of the head and usually in a small area.

A single, large purple spot near the tip of the tongue may indicate an old injury in the
head.

When one has liver yang rising due to emotional problems, there appears a headache
which settles in the area of the head where the old trauma occurred.

Child births and miscarriages : 9¥a ed "UT :

Many child births and/or miscarriages seriously weaken liver, kidneys and conception
vessel.

A deficiency of kidneys and liver may cause deficiency type of headaches due to
kidney essence not reaching the head.

A deficiency of kidneys and liver may produce rising of liver yang and cause headaches.

A Treatise on “Ny

238 Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 20

