sphenoid sinusitis produces pain which does not occur in defined areas and may be
felt in the front or back of the head.

Any change in vision or swelling around the eye is a very serious condition, that can
quickly, within hours result in blindness

The symptoms of chronic sinusitis are usually mild. Pain occurs less often. Common
symptoms are : nasal obstruction, nasal congestion and post nasal drip.

The patient may feel generally il! which is called malaise.

0 Aetiology of Sinusitis wgaragiea a wenn fear :

i) According to allopathy, infections from the common cold or influenza viruses frequently
cause secondary infection in the sinuses. Sinus infection becomes chronic in course
of time.

The openings through which the maxillary sinuses communicate with the nasal cavi-
ties are narrow. The inflammation of the mucous lining them prevents adequate drain-
age of the infected sinuses. This causes resolution of sinus, infection is often slow
and incomplete. When the next viral infection from common cold or influenza occurs,
the already infected and inflammed sinuses get affected again.

The repeated infections by common cold or influenza viruses leads to chronic sinusitis.

ii) According to traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) repeated attacks of external wind-
heat, impair the dispersing and descending of lung Qi in the nasal passges. Hence,
the fluids stagnate in the nose and sinuses. Long standing stagnation of fluids causes
phlegm and heat which produces yellow, purulent nasal discharge.

Repeated attacks of external wind are the main causes of sinusitis, when the person
does not take extra care & rest during such attacks.

itil) Diet men:

Excessive greasy-hot foods produces phlegm and heat and leads to sinusitis. This
type of food may also produce humid heat in the stomach and spleen which goes up
to the sinuses and causes sinusitis.

© Patterns of sinusitis and their treatments :
There are four patterns of sinusitis :
SATB TR TAR Bt ah eB :

1) Attack of external wind-heat on lungs causes an acute attack of sinusitis.

at art Tat & arpa } agteagite or vows ae anew eta a)

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 20

