Other symptoms of strokes 31d & 3ra Mant :

i)

ii)

ili)

iv)
v)

vi)
vii)

viii)

x)
xi)

In both types of strokes, an abnormal patter of breathing can occur slow, irrigular
breathing may be caused by herniation of the brain. Herniation develops high
pressure in skull and forces the brain downwards in the skull and the respira-
tory centre in the lower part of brain gets compressed.

Strokes that cause unconciousness or that affect a large part of the left side of
brain are particularly grave.

Left side of brain affected & % aie aw ot aaa a one & cen Mt Fr
grarat wafer ef sett 21

Right side of brain affected 1 9% aril aw GT creat et Stee!

t@d & Ae muscles may become permanently spastic & stift. Painful muscle
spasms may occur.

Walking, swallowing, physically speaking word clearly and performing daily
activities may remain difficult.

Problems with memory, thinking, attention or learning may persist.

The person may be unable to recognise parts of body and may be unaware of
the stroke's effect.

The person may feel depressed. The peripheral vision may be reduced.
The hearing may be partially lost.

Dizziness & vertigo may be continuing problems.

Control of bowel or bladder function may be permanently impaired.
Strokes that cause unconciousness are grave.

Strokes that affect a large part of the left side of brain causes hemiplegia of the
right side of the body with speech problem. This type of stroke is serious.

In adults who had ischemic stroke, and consequent neurological losses that
remain after six months are likely to be permanent. Hence, first six months are
very important for such stroke. Proper treatment during first six months of such
strokes may reverse the neurological 'osses substantially.

Children, who had stroke, continue te improve slowly for many months.
Older pecple fare less well than younger people.

If a hemorrhagic stroke is not massive and pressure with the brain is not very
high, outcome is likely to be better than after an ischemic attack.
