Chapter - |
Introduction of Ayurvedic Acupressure

The word ‘Ayurveda’ and its origin are undoubtedly older than Acupressure.
The explanation of ‘marma’ and ‘prana’ in Ayurveda bears an apparent similarity
with ‘qu’ or ‘ch?, which forms the basis of Chinese Acupressure/Acupuncture. Not
only this; Energy system, the basis of modern physiology, is also similarly
comparable. Prana, qui and energy, all three have uniformity. Ayurveda is the
knowledge of eternal life in which qui, chi or energy all have been incorporated.
Western concepts of physiology and anatomy are only some centuries old whereas
Ayurveda is as old as thousands of years. The descriptions written in the chapters
‘sutra sthana’ and ‘shareersthana’ of Ayurveda are omnipresent and omniscience,
that is unaffected by the barriers of geography and time, accurate and a source of
modern physiology and anatomy.

The knowledge of Ayurveda is limitless, infinite and most virtuous — which can
only be understood by a deep learning of the subject.

Originally, Brahma was the creator of the Ayurveda. With the passage of time,
Lord Indra and others acquired this knowledge and promoted it on earth, for the
sake of mankind. This knowledge has only been transcribed in the last few thousand
years.

Lord Brahma being its creator, the Ayurveda is of divine nature. And Ayurvedic
Acupressure, being based on this Ayurvedic vision, is also full of divinity.

Although because of the development and encouragement of acupuncture in
China, the therapy is considered Chinese; however, there are ample proofs in the
Hindu scriptures to prove its Indian origin. From the earliest times, our ‘rishis’ have
kept themselves healthy by applying pressure on different parts of the palm and the
body. Five elements — earth, fire, wind, water and space, have been an inseparable
part of the Indian philosophy. With a little bit of modification, the five elements and
their related energies have been made the basis of Chinese Acupuncture.

During the evolution of this system, different branches of acupuncture based
on different theories were born. Among these, ‘Sujok’, by the Late Korean Professor
Sir Park Jae Woo, and ‘Electro Acupuncture’, by the German allopath therapist, Dr.
Wall are prominent. In all of the above mentioned systems, the laws of ‘Chinese
Acupuncture’ have been followed in general, apart from their own specialities.

en)
