2)

The walls of this chamber, as mentioned before, are thin because it only
needs to receive the impure blood and then push it enough to transfer it to
the right ventricle through the valve. The volume of the right atrium decreases
due to contraction. This generates pressure which opens the valve and forces
the blood through it into the right ventricle. Due to the blood’s pressure, the
valve opens and the blood flows towards the ventricle instead of going back
into the vena cava. Therefore, the right atrium has only three openings of-

1) Superior vena cava
2) Inferior vena cava
3) The valve in-between the right atrium and ventricle.

Right Ventricle :

From the right atrium, the impure blood flows through the valve and falls into
the right ventricle. The contraction of the walls of the right atrium generates
pressure which forces the blood, resulting in the opening of the door of the
valve and flowing of the impure blood into the ventricle. Once the blood is in
the ventricle, it cannot return back because of the closure of the valve. Soon,
the right ventricle contracts as well, as a result forcing the blood out of the
heart. The blood cannot flow anywhere except the pulmonary artery.
Pulmonary artery is the only vessel leading out of the right ventricle, which
later separates into two parts and goes into the left and right lungs. As soon
as the right ventricle contracts, the impure blood flows through it and moves
towards the lungs for purification. As soon as the blood moves from the
ventricle into the pulmonary artery, the door at the opening of the artery closes,
thus stopping the blood from flowing back into the ventricle. Pulmonary artery
is an exception; because all other arteries carry pure blood through them.

It has been named pulmonary artery on the same principle by which the
vessels taking blood out of the heart are known as arteries. With respect to
the right atrium, the walls of the ventricle are stronger, because it has to do
the additional work of pumping the blood so that it can reach the lungs for
purification.
