These cusps of the valves fully control the atrio ventricular opening. Due to
contraction of the atrium, the blood pushes the cusps open and flows into the ventricle.
This is followed by the immediate closing of the cusps. Even with extreme velocity,
the blood is not able to push open the cusps and return back as the chordae tendinae
holds the cusps firmly and tightly. In some diseases, these cusps are damaged,
thus preventing the heart from performing its functions.

The number of cusps of different valves of the heart is not the same everywhere.
The valves are made up of two or three cusps in different chambers of the heart. The
valve in between the right atrium and ventricle has three cusps. Hence, it is known
as tricuspid valve. Similarly, the valve in between the left atrium and ventricle has
two cusps and is known as bicuspid valve. The formation of bicuspid valve appears
to look like the ‘hat of a pope’ and hence is also known as mitral valve.

Valves are present not only at the atrio ventricular opening, but also at the
openings of the pulmonary artery and aorta. However, their formation is somewhat
different in those places.

Each valve of the arteries has three semi-lunar cusps. It is because of these
cusps that the valves have been named semi-lunar valves. Their formation is like a
bowl-shaped pocket, whose rear slippery part is towards the ventricles and front
deep part is towards the artery. Due to the contraction of ventricles, when the blood
moves into the big vessels, the three cusps move towards the wall of the artery and
the blood having favourable-flow-route moves forward.

The moment the blood enters the artery, the bowl-like empty parts of these
cusps fill up and expand. They fully expand and close the opening of the artery and
the blood cannot return back from the artery to the ventricle. In this way, the semi-
lunar valves fully control the openings of the arteries. The valves of the heart greatly
contribute in the convenient unidirectional flow of blood in the circulatory system. In
every position, where they are present, they prevent the blood from returning back;
because their cusps cannot open in opposite direction.

Just like arteries have semi-lunar valves, similarly the veins in the upper parts of the
body have valves in between. Valves are present inside the veins at regular intervals.
These valves open towards the heart. Hence, the blood which passes through the
valve cannot return back and continues its journey towards the heart. The veins of
the internal organs of the body do not often have valves in them. Due to excessive
hard-work by the organs, the ability of the valves of their veins comes to an end and

3)
