which is in relaxed state at the moment. The moment the left ventricle fills up with
blood, the bicuspid valve in between closes. Now the time for the ventricle to contract
arrives, and as a result pure blood flows out of the heart through the aorta and from
here leaves for its long journey for distribution throughout the whole body. Thus, we
see that the heart works only as a pump. Blood comes inside of it from one
direction, and is pumped out of it from the other.

The formation of the walls of the chambers of the heart is in accordance with
their workload, that is the walls of the ventricles in comparison to atriums are thicker
and stronger and walls of the left ventricle in comparison to that of right is thicker
and stronger.

0 Heart Beat:

A healthy human’s heart beats 72 times in a minute. This is called beating of
the heart. This rate of beating can be high or low. In each beat, firstly the atriums
contract and then the ventricles contract. This is followed by their continuous
relaxation. This cycle in full rhythm continues life-long.

Due to the atriums contraction, the blood flows into the ventricle. The atrio
ventricular opening gets closed. At this moment because of filling up with blood, the
blood pressure in ventricles increase and they start to contract. The semi-lunar valves
at the opening of the arteries open and the blood is pumped into them. Both ventricles
contract simultaneously. As the ventricles contract, the narrow part of the heart, the
apex collides with the inner wall. This produces sound which is heard as beating by
us. In the middle of the chest three and a quarter inch towards the left, by placing
hand near the fifth and sixth ribs it can be felt. Immediately after this, expansion of
the atriums starts. The heart beats 70-72 times per minute.

In children, the heart-beat rate is much faster. The rate of heart-beat of a person
depends on his age, body posture, physical and mental state and many other causes.
With the increase in age, the rate of heart-beat keeps on decreasing. During exercise,
impulsive depression, emotional disturbances and certain diseases, the heart-beat
rate increases.
