Tk Capos Ts cl, LEAVENSS TN CHEST THEN TRENT SPENE _
TF TT Probl you Lease ahh Sevisahecn

© Heart-Sound : Baos PEApre ene

The sound of the heart can be heard by placing the ear near the heart. This
sound sounds similar to the pronunciation of the words ‘lubb-dup’. The first sound is
generated due to the closing of the bicuspid and tricuspid valve. The second sound
is generated because of the closing of the valves of the aorta and the pulmonary
veins. This sound can be heard more clearly with a stethoscope. This sound of
heart is very important in the diagnosis of diseases.

The first sound generates with the same moment as the heart contracts. Hence,
it is known as systolic sound and the second sound generates with the beginning of
the relaxation state, hence it is known as diastole sound.

The first sound is somewhat long, slow and continues for a longer span, and is.
generated due to the closing of the cusps of the valve in between the left atrium and
ventricle. The first sound is similar to ‘lU..........0+008 bb’and the cause of this extension
is the tightening of the chords due to the closing of the cusps. According to some
experts, the trembling of the heart muscles might also be a reason.

The second word ‘dup’ is hard, smalland has a shorter time-span. The closing
of the semi-lunar cusps of the aorta
and pulmonary artery generates this Flelaxed
sound. muscle

By hearing these sounds, the
doctors diagnose the heart diseases.
When the cusps of the valve become
diseased or inactive, they are unable z
to fully close the valves of the Valves open
chambers and some of the blood
returns from the ventricle to the atrium.

Due to this inactivenessor
diseased state of the cusps, the first
sound does not finish, and in its place
only amurmur is heard.

In cardiac-depression, the heart-
sound becomes slow.

DIASTOLE - OCUnES KM TR

eos Relanes AIR Conve clon

Allows tHe cammoces te FZUL
luyTw bLon.

ve, TO heart

Contracted
muscle

Proximal valve open,
distal valve closed

