>

0 Blood Vessels :

1)

2)

we
Artery : ee’

Among the channels distributing the heart’s blood throughout the bocy,
artery is the most important. The artery circulates pure blood in the body.
Although the channels carrying blood out of the heart are also known as
artery. This is why the channel carrying impure blood from the right atrium
to the lungs is known as pulmonary ajtery. But the reality is that all the
arteries of the circulatory system except pulmonary artery have pure blood
in them.

The aorta is the first channel to carry pure blood out of the heart. It is aiso
the thickest, pure-blood carrying channel. Its thickness is about an inch.
Its walls are also very thick and strong. A large number of branches move
out of the aorta. These branches carry blood to all the main organs. Each
time a branch moves out of an artery, its size is smaller than the parent
artery. Even these arteries have sub-branches, which are thinner in size
than the artery. These are known as arterioles. With a continuous decrease
in size, the smallest branches of arterioles are spread like webs, in the
form of cells throughout the body and provide nutrients and oxygen to the
far-distant cells by way of pure blood. The arteries are named after the
parts in which they move. For example, the artery moving into the abdomen
is known as abdominal aorta, the artery moving into the thorax is known
as thoracic aorta, the one moving into the upper-arms as radial artery and
ulnar artery, the one moving from near the neck into the shoulders as sub-
clavian artery, into the thighs as femoral artery and into the kidneys as
renal artery. Similarly, the names of other arteries are based on those
organs and parts in which they move.

Veins:

In the circulatory system, the vessels carrying impure blood are known as
veins. The channels carrying blood into and towards the heart are known
as veins. This is why the four channels bringing the purified blood from the
lungs are known as pulmonary veins. But in reality, all the veins of the
body except pulmonary veins have impure blood flowing through them.
