Tetralogy of Fallot -
(TOF)

Thoracotomy = -

Trans Fat .

Transesophageal -
Echocardiography
(TEE)
Transplantation -
Transposition of -
(Also called Trans
position of the great
vessels)

Tricuspid Atresia-

Tricuspid Valve -

Triglyceride :

Trisomy 21 -
‘(Also called Down
syndrome)

Truncus arteriosus -

A group of congenital heart defects, including a ventricular
septal defect, obstruction to blood flow out of the right
ventricle to the lungs, and an aorta that is shifted to the
right. Enlargement of the right ventricle occurs as the right
ventricle copes with obstruction to blood flow.

An incision made on the right or left side of the chest
between the ribs, in order to access the heart or lungs
during surgery.

Vegetable oil that has been treated with hydrogen in oda

to make it more solid and give it a longer shelf life.

A diagnostic test that uses a long tube guided into the
mouth, throat, and esophagus to evaluate the structures
inside the heart with sound waves.

Replacing a damaged organ with one from a donor.

Acongenital heart defect involving abnormal development
of the great arteries (the aorta and the pulmonary artery)
during the time the heart is forming prior to birth. The aorta
ends up being connected to the right ventricle, and the
pulmonary artery is connected to the left ventricle, which
is the opposite of how they are normally connected.

A congenital heart defect in which the tricuspid valve
and right ventricle do not develop properly, preventing
oxygen-poor (blue) blood from reaching the lungs via its
normal pathway.

The heart valve that controls blood flow from the right
atrium into the right ventricle.

A fat-like substance found in the blood.

The presence of three #21 chromosomes in each cell of
the body, rather than the usual pair, which causes the
features otherwise known as Down syndrome. Many
children with Down syndrome also have congenital heart
disease - usually atrioventricular canal defect.

A congenital heart defect involving incomplete
separation of the great arteries (the aorta and the
pulmonary artery) during the time the heart is forming
prior to birth.
