Therefore there is no option but to accept and to practice of what is there in
Vedas. Ayurveda is part of Atharva veda and deals with all aspects of life process
from origin to end (death). Vision of Ayurveda is to maintain the life process bestowed
upon us in healthy manner. When life process succumbs to illness that can be
restored and health can be maintained as good health by practising in the ways of
Ayurveda. Combination of Acupressure under the vision of Ayurveda makes it most
potent branch of Acupressure and has been named as Ayurvedic Acupressure.

What is Acupressure

On human body specific points, identified by scientists and scholars, when
pressed by any blunt object or finger tips, this pressure causes balance of energy in
body organ related to the point. This is known as acupressure. Such point is known
as Acu point.

Acupuncture - When such points of energy are stimulated by use of

needle, it is called acupuncture.

Magnet Therapy- In cases where magnets are used on acu points it is

called magneto-therapy.

Colour Therapy- — Similarly colour can be used on such points, it is known
as colour therapy.

Seed Therapy - In day to day life this science is so simple and in place of
needle magnets, colour only seeds can be applied on
acupoints. It is known as seed therapy.

The effects of acupressure are three-dimensional. Diagnosis of disease,
protection of health as well as treatment, all can be done merely by applying pressure
at acu points. Charak Ayurvedic Acupressure Part 1 and 2, published by Sansthan
clearly explains the process of diagnosis and treatment of disease. Now, this book
explains the role and importance of circulatory system in human anatomy and the
treatment of the related diseases.

Profound theories say that blood is the most important connective tissue of the
human body. It flows in every part of the body and provides nutrition and energy.
The nutrition required to keep body cells healthy is provided by the blood. The toxins
produced in the cells are excreted out by the blood to keep the body healthy. Clearly,
to keep the body healthy, nutrition as well as the excretion of toxins is most important.
Both of these tasks are performed by the heart and the related circulatory system

(zn)
