Inthe body, the veins are often found close to the skin, whereas the arteries
stay in the internal regions, their safety being much important. Even by
looking at the skin one can notice the presence of blue veins under the
skin. The

Blood in the veins flows towards the heart. Therefore, in order to maintain

this flow of blood towards the heart, valves are present in the veins at

regular intervals. The semi-lunar cusps of the valve of the veins open in

the direction of the heart and the blood successfully finds its way of flowing

& towards the heart. However, it cannot return back in the opposite direction.
pa Generally, such valves are present in the veins of the upper part of the
v body. Valves are absent from the veins of the internal organs of the body.

3) Capillaries:

oie \® Be Capillaries are microscopic channels through which are transported to

rec) the tissues and cells. They are finer than hairand spread like web over

BW yew every cell of the body. They are present in every part of the body. Their

diameter is about the diameter of the red blood cells and the RBCs flow

through it in a line. Their walls are made up of a single layer of cells. The

cells of the walls are linked together by a formation consisting of several

1 as Me holes. The wall is so formed that the white blood cells and blood plasma

' “move out of it. Through these walls, nutrients and oxygen are transported

| ¢cpsmm to the tissues, and carbon dioxide and other chemical wastes enter into
2 ) the capillaries, transforming them into venules.

ow ne The function of the capillaries is to bring the blood to the cells, provide
them with nutrients and receive wastes from them. While traveling in the
rs as.,mm cells, the blood distributes the nutrients and oxygen and receives the
wastes generated in the cells transforming the capillaries into venules.
VS AMM. Qs avo The venules keep joining together and their size keeps on increasing.
‘ Thus, veins are built by capillaries. Capillaries are extremely soft. Their
1" 25-49 walls often get damaged while carrying blood to individual cells of the
a body. But nature has taken care of their immediate repair. The platelets
“gs-4x10° present in the blood adheres the broken or damaged part and closes them.
ws In this way, they get continuously repaired without any outer help. With a
- sow deficiency of platelets in the blood, the self-repairing ability of capillaries

is reduced.

G2

