Vagus nerve is the tenth cranial nerve. It comes out with the carotid artery and
vein, passes through the neck and reaches the chest near the heart where a number
of threads emerge from it forming a plexus covering the heart from all sides. These
branches of the vagus nerve play the same role in slowing and stopping the pace of
the heart as the reinsplay in controlling the pace of a horse. The branches of the
vagus nerve prevent the heart from beating at a very high rate. Under certain
circumstances when the connection of the branches of this nerve is cut down from
the heart or they are rendered inactive by use of certain chemicals, the heart starts
to contract and relax rapidly and the rate of heart-beat becomes extremely high,
resulting in the finishing up of energy and causing the muscles to weaken, and the
heart to collapse.

In this way, these two nerves fully control the functioning of the heart. When
there is a need of excess blood, the branches of sympathetic nerve make the heart
pump faster, and when this need is fulfilled, the branches of vagus nerve bring down
this rate to normal.

Both these nerves are controlled by the ‘vaso-motor centre’ region of the
medulla-oblongata. The vaso-motor centre keeps receiving information through the
branches of sensory nerves from every part of the body. The impulses are generated
at this very place. The impulses reach the middle part of the medulla through the
branches. From there, it reaches the heart muscles with the branches of sympathetic
nerve. Through these nerves, the heart receives the permission to fulfil the need of
excess blood of a specific region and with the permission from the centre this demand
is fulfilled.

The reddening of face while in anger, paling due to fear and the increase in
skin temperature after hard work are all examples of functions performed by the
permission of this system.

As in the case of heart, the arteries also contain branches from two nerves:
vaso-constrictor and vaso-dilator. These branches control the contraction and
expansion of the arteries, and through them the nervous system fully controls the
blood flowing through the arteries. The vaso-constrictor reduces the flow of blood
while the vaso-dilator increases it allowing larger amount of blood to flow through
the arteries.

Gs)
