O Weak Heart:

A healthy body corresponds to a healthy heart. The energy and strength of the
body is proportional to the capacity of the heart. The heart of a healthy body is not
generally weak. The heart develops with the development of the body.

Although heart is a small organ, yet it has to do much more work than any other
organ. To understand the workload of the heart, clench your palm into a fist, then
open it wide and try to perform this process 72 times in a minute. The heart similarly
contracts and relaxes 72 times in a minute, one lakh times in a day, 40 crore times in
a yearand keeps continuing year after year till death.

The muscles of the heart are the sturdiest and toughest in the whole body. This
is in accordance with the nature of their work. The heart has to pump 2000 gallons
of blood per day. The workload of heart is equal to that of a person carrying a weight
4.5 kg up to a height of 3 feet every 30 seconds.

The heart is such an organ of the body which if not kept in good condition
would lose its ability to work. However, it must not be considered weak. Instead it
should be kept in good condition which can be easily done. By keeping the heart
muscles in good condition, they can be kept prepared in need of emergency. The
contract ability of the heart muscles and the stretch ability of blood vessels can only
be maintained through exercise, else they get jammed.

Through properly regulated activities, the heart muscles gain strength and
become strong. Because of its larger size and stronger contraction, a good-
conditioned heartcan pump the same amount of blood in 60 beats which a fast and
shallow stroke of an unconditioned heart can pump in 80 beats.

This saving of 20 beats per minute means a saving of 1200 beats per hour,
29000 beats per day and by staying fit a saving of 10.5 crore throughout the year. If
the heart is in a good exercise condition, in times of need it can increase its total
output to two, even three times without any undue strain or pressure. It also acquires
the ability to control and slow down its speed after fulfilling the needs by the increased
output.

Exercise affects the functioning of the heart in another way as well. Exercise
improves the stretch ability of the arteries allowing them to expand like rubber-tubes.
Without any proper exercise, the muscles of the arteries become stiff, their stretch
