€s
ENVE

ability gets reduced and they are unable to efficiently transport blood to such parts
which need it urgently. Whenever they have to fulfil urgent needs, they go through a
lot of strain and pressure, and yet the oxygen demands of the organ remain unfulfilled,
further affecting the functioning of the organ.

The heart itself receives blood from the coronary arteries. Its fulfilment of blood
requirements depends on their stretch ability. Only if they are highly stretchable can
they supply blood to different working organs of the body.

All of this is only possible when the muscles of the heart and vessels are kept
in good condition through exercise. The heart grows with the body, hence the ...
which make the body rough and tough can also be used to make the heart strong.
By gradually increasing the amount of exercise and work, the heart muscles can be

properly developed.

Walking is the best exercise for a healthy heart. While walking, the long muscles
of the legs contract. This further contracts the veins and pumps the blood up towards
the heart. Thus while walking, the muscles of the legs help complete one-third part
of the work of blood circulation while the rest two-third work is done by the heart.
This is why Dr. White has said “The best way to keep fit is to walk and walk and
walk.”

Among the heart diseases, arteriosclerosis is mainly responsible for most deaths
due to heart diseases. In this disease, the elasticity of the walls of the coronary
arteries comes to an end, they become rigid and the blood supply to that part of the
heart stops. If the muscles which have to work so hard to make life possibledon’'t get
enough oxygen and food energy, then death is a certainty.

Arteriosclerosis occurs in different parts of the body due to aging and plenty of
other reasons. The walls of the arteries get damaged because of pressure resulting
in the formation of blood clots acting as barriers in the path of the blood. Along with
aging, high blood pressure, obesity, diabetes and hypertension are also causes of
heart diseases. According to H. Shiriyok, to save oneself from heart diseases, one
must incorporate the following six rules to their lifestyle:

1) Provide for daily exercise
2) Avoid over-eating
3) Reduce saturated fats in food
Agari THAT CONTAIN
ony SATE TEN FATTY

Acrp ES soetn AT ROM -
Temp. Ex Burreh, PALMOrL , Cocondr of d,
