comprising of arteries and veins. According to the circulatory system, the human
body is divided into ten parts (sections) and in each part ten meridians are identified
based on the arteries and veins carrying blood from and to the heart. On these
meridians various acupoints are located, from Ayurvedic Acupressure point of view,
which are related with the Ten elements and the simple. process of treatment of
various diseases related with various parts of the body has been given. The body is
divided into ten parts - head, neck, chest, upper and lower abdomen, groin area,
two hands and two legs. For every part ten arteries and veins have been located
and the regions covered by them are presented through Tables and Diagrams. By
looking through these covered regions the related meridians for the treatment can
be identified. It is explained clearly in the treatment section of the book.

Since the characteristics of Ayurvedic Acupressure have been elaborated in
previous books, hence only a brief introduction of the topic is given here. This book
mainly focuses on circulatory system as blood provides nutrition to the whole body.
The smallest part of the body can be prevented from malnutrition. In this way the
body can be protected from severe diseases.

The infinite dimensionality of Ayurveda has been proved by the continuous
scientific researches. The body contains an infinite network of blood vessels. Only
major blood vessels have been identified and the process is still going on. Blood
vessels in limbs and heart (coronary artery) are both important for the body; however
blood circulation when hindered in case of heart may result into sudden death while
in case of limbs it causes improper growth, polio etc. Hence, the treatment is also
effective in case of blockage of blood vessels in heart. Similarly malnutrition related
skin diseases, boils, swelling, aches and baldness have also been seen getting
cured. Treatment given on ten meridians on left and right side of the head is found
effective in case of mentally retarded children. The treatment is so simple that it is
easily done by people from rural as well as urban background for a long time period,
on their own. During change in weather, paralysis resulting from blockage of blood
vessels in head, due to extreme cold shows great improvement on timely treatment.
Like this, many other miraculous results have inspired me to dedicate my
experiences, through this book, to the service of mankind. In this book, the
nomenclature and the role of the various blood vessels have been taken from modern
medical science, to which the principles of Ayurvedic Acupressure have been
applied. Due to lack of formal training in medical science there may be some technical
faults here and there, however we believe those faults will not hinder the reader as
our conscience is pure.

7
