temporary. In such a situation, with a simple use af probe on the meridian pointing
to the circulation of the related body part, the pain instantly disappears and the pain
and swelling slowly diminish and finally disappear. The prominent reason for
permanent changein blood circulation is the presence of cholesterol and toxins in
blood which gradually decrease the rate of flow of blood circulation leading to
blockage. If the 10 main arteries of the heart get blocked, it can be injurious to life
and with negligence for a long time can result in the death of the patient. Due to
blockage of the arteries related to different organs of the’body, the work ability of
these organs decrease and various related symptoms occur. We know that for the
healthy activity of each organ nutrients are required by way of blood and this is
possible by the proper circulation of blood,produced by food, in the arteries. The
obstruction in the fulfilment of blood in the lungs leads to breathing problems which
is at times, uncontrollable even with the use of several inhalers and medicines. In
such cases, by treating the meridians of blood vessels related to the lungs serious
diseases like asthma can be cured. Similarly, by treating the arteries related to the
liver, kidneys and spleen, chronic diseases of various types can be controlled, whose
treatment protocol will be provided in the following pages.

Such kinds of obstructions can be treated with 4, 5 3, 6 in which two pairs 4, 5
and 3, 6 are used. As we know that in Ayurveda water (4) and earth (5) combine to
form kapha and fire (3) and time (6) are the refined form of pitta. Here, as a result of
combined thinking of Ayurveda and physiology, fire and time together has been
taken as the controller of kapha. In Ayurveda, kapha is a force whose distortion is
taken to be the cause of origin of chronic diseases. Stagnation is taken as kapha
and heaviness is also a symptom of kapha. A blockage or swelling of any type for
whatever reason in blood,walls of blood vessels or glands of any organ represents
kapha and by sedating its related elements and their related energies, that is 4, 5
the blockage or stagnation of kapha can be removed. The reason for toning 3, 6 are-
‘6 is time (kaal) and season. Itis a trait of kaal to keep hot things hot and cool things
cool. Hence, the elements fire and time can remove stagnation or blockage by melting
and burning. According to human physiology, in Ayurvedic Acupressure similarity
has been established between kaal (6) and nervous system. In this way, all the
diseases related to circulation whether of the body organs, joints, eyes, ear vessels,
brain haemorrhage fibroids, lumps or nodes can be treated by: 4,5 - sedate and 3,6

- tone.
