Analysis :

Due to gaseous change in the blood, symptoms of swelling with redness,
burning, pain, anxiety are found in the related region. With that, symptoms of itching
in skin, inflammation, roughness, blackening, rashes and spots are found, because
we know that according to scientists there are three states of matter- solid, liquid
and gas which are interrelated among each other. We know that water and fire are
cordially present in ice. With a reduction in temperature, liquid turns into solid and
with an increase in temperature, solid turns into liquid and finally into gas with a
continuous rise in temperature. So, if there is a burning sensation in skin, or muscles,
or itching, all these symptoms appear due to gaseous change in blood. When these
types of symptoms are present in the blood then shifting-pain, anxiety, and
uneasiness are observed. Due to the dominance of the fire element, any element in
any form like the flames of fire always rise upwards like that in any organ increase in
temperature that is because of excess of fire, burning or flames of fire (hot flushes)
or gases originating from it in any form rise upwards. As the gas rises upwards, its
intensity decreases and in the end it turns into vapour, cools down and collects
wherever it finds space or cavity. For example, with an excess of acidity in the
stomach, burning in the throat and sinus like diseases are seen together. As we
know that, sinuses are minute paths which are attached to the head and brain. Hence,
we can say that disease of sinus, migraine or headache occuring due to acidity lead
to the formation of cyst and nodes in the brain due to continuous increase of other
types of kapha. Therefore, ignorance of acidity leads to chronic diseases. Even
nerves are affected due to acidity causing vertigo, tremors and numbness and fatigue,
loss of energy, no desire for work occur due to the effect on nervous system.
Sometimes, abrasion or ulcer occurs in the organs of gastro-intestinal tract which
gradually increases leading to bleeding and causessymptoms of epistaxis, blood in
saliva or blood in stool to originate all of which are somehow related to acidity. So,
we can say that in general cause is one but diseases are many. Hence, for all
diseases of such type, treatment 2, 3) 1, 47 in meridians of arteries should be given.
The reason for this treatment is that the elements fire and wind, are dominating.
Generally, we know that wind is responsible for increasing the fire.Fire creates a
burning sensation and the fire generated due to wind burns anything and blackens
it. So, such parts of the skin which are itchy, turn black due to itching and burning.
From the Ayurvedic point of view, functions and attributes of vaayu generate dryness,
roughness and harshness and that of fire generate hotness and intensity. Hence,
