Analysis :

For the treatment of the above mentioned infection, two pairs of two points
among the four chosen points are- 3,4 and 0, 9. According to the Ten Origin Principle,
zero is related to (0) origin (tama), (9) light (prakash), (3) heat (agni) and (4) water

(jal). As we know that parasites are of five types:

1) Fungus TY py ophantsn WHTCH LEVES TN OK OM Andi tHER
OkGANSsmCITS Host) Ano Oeneeris BY
DE RIvema nurRiewT AT THE ort ERS

ExPEenscs.

2) Virus

3) Bacteria
4) Protozoa
5) Worms and Helminths

They are the main factors for all types of infectious disease. There has been
detailed study in the western in this subject. On the basis of this study and knowledge,
treatment protocols of infection have been prepared by use of which treatments of
infection in various parts of the body will be given in this book, whose . The order of
origin starts from O. It is the order of evolution and is supported by mathematics. All
the later values are based on 0-9. 0 is darkness while 9 is light. In the order of
evolution of energy, zero, cavity or darkness is such a centre of energy where the
bacteria like to dwell but by increasing the zero energy they have to shift from their
place in the stage of development and by reducing the last energy light, the end of
the bacteria is definite. Therefore, for the treatment of infection, Otand 9J is used. It
is often seen that the patients affected with infection are recommended by the therapist
to drink water which has been boiled, that is purified. In Ayurveda, the work of fire is
burning and digestion by which poisonous matters are burned and destroyed. This
is why by increasing the fire (3) element the infection originating in the water is
controlled. Hence, general infection can be treated by 0, 374, 9) according to
symptoms. It is important to mention here that in the present times, more than fifty
per cent diseases generate due to the internal and external pollution of the everyday
atmosphere. Hence, it is a very important treatment protocol which will be used
frequently, but the meridians will be different according to the affected parts of the

body.
