In the diagram and table, classification of various parts of the female organ
system, uterus (based on ten origin) has been given. On the basis of the functioning
of the related organs, all the diseases related to the reproductive system can be
cured by treating the 10 horizontal meridians or 5 regional long meridians marked
on the right thumb or right big toe.Among the main diseases related to the formation
of the uterus in the reproductive system are menstrual disorder, uterine fibroid, cyst,
uterus or cervix cancer, etc.

Among the main diseases based on the functions of the various parts of the
uterus, menstrual disorder is the most common. Menstrual flow starts in girls of 12 to
15 years of age and stops during the middle age of women. The absence of
menarche or a scanty menstruation indicates a decreased chance of a female's
capability to become a mother. Those girls or women in which hairs don’t appear in
the axial or groin region have also been seen to be devoid of motherhood. The
patients coming to the Sansthan with such kind of diseases have been treated on
the meridians of graha, yama, niyama, etc. along with the reproductive system
treatment under the DewyapaashrayaChikitsa. In some cases, success has been
achieved.

In females, excess (atiyoga), scanty (ayoga) and mithya yoga (amenorrhoea or
absence of menstruation for months) of menstrual flow causes depression, anxiety,
uneasiness along with physical diseases and affects the physique and mental state.
So, menstrual flow on time and for a regular time period (3 to 5 days) is a sign of
healthiness.

A blockage in the uterine tube (left or right) makes it difficult to become a mother
and hence, requires treatment. Its treatment should be given on the horizontal
meridian 1 & 2 given in the table. Hormones are secreted by ovary and their absence,
scanty or excess leads to decrease in the fertility of females, unshaped or overweight
(especially in the buttocks) body. For this, treatment should be given on the 5 the gl 6 th
horizontal meridian of the right thumb. For the irregularities in menstrual flow,these
meridians need to be treated.

For the prevention of cervix cancer on the a horizontal meridian and in case

of cervix cancer treatment should be given on the three RLHMs, 4/5, 6/7, 8/9.
