If we closely follow this order of blood circulation, it can be observed that left
ventricle is the basis of pure blood and from here the blood starts its journey. From
here, the pure blood passes through the aorta for distribution into the body. The
aorta moves out of the heart,bents a little upwards, forms an arch and then comes
down. In this way, from the very beginning of its journey in the chest, the aorta takes
up three forms and directions. The part moving upward is known as ascending aorta.
The bent part which forms a semi-circle is known as arch of aorta and the part coming
back down is known as descending aorta. The left and right coronary artery move
out from the ascending aortaand provides blood to the heart. Three big arteries
move out from the arch of aorta and carry blood to the upper parts of the body. The
descending aorta comes down, passes through the diaphragm, divides into branches
and sub-branches, and carries blood to the stomach and other lower parts of the
body.Blood vessels transform into fine capillaries to reach individual cells. After
distributing the life-saving fluids, these capillaries fill up with the wastes collected
from the cells.

These fine channels filled with wastes are known as venules. A number of
these venules containing impure blood form a vein. Similarly, a number of veins
together form the superior vena cava and inferior vena cava which collects the impure
blood from the upper and lower parts of the body respectively and carry it to the right
chamber of the heart.

After providing blood to the heart, the coronary artery comes into the right
atrium in the form of coronary vein. In this way, the right atrium stores the impure
blood from the whole body and sends it to the right ventricle. The impure blood of
the right ventricle moves into the pulmonary artery to reach the lungs for purification.
In the lungs, the impure blood takes oxygen from the inhaled air, and gives back
carbon dioxide and other gases. Thus, the blood becomes pure and by way of returns
back to the right atrium. The atrium sends the pure blood to the left ventricle and in
this manner, the blood completes its cycle which continues life-long.

The heart is made up of three layers :
1. Pericardium (outer)

2. Myocardium (middle)

3. Endocardium (inner)
