Sp 1:

SP2:

SP1a:
SP4:

Tw2
Sti1

Sp6/Pn6:

K7:

Liv5:

MP white blood cell in the upper part of the body. Treat this point for the attack of
infection on upper part of body.

This point of responsible for manufacturing the white pulp of the spleen, which
is responsible for irritation in the lymph glands of the upper half of the body in
response to invasion by microbes in the upper half of the body

MP white blood cells in the lower part of the body. Treat this point when there is
an attack of infection in the lower part of body. This point of responsible for
manufacturing the white pulp of spleen which is responsible for irritation in the
lymph glands of the lower half of the body in response to invasion by microbes
in the lower half of the body.

C.M.P. Spleen

MP. reticulo endothecia defence function of spleen (R.E.S.)

(i) This point is related to lymphocytes in blood.

(ii) Monocytes & macrophages are formed here.

(iii) Fat, protein & bacteria's are neutralized here

(iv) Treathere the infections disease caused by bacteria leading to swelling of spleen.

(v) Due to excess destruction of red blood cells the quantity of iron increases.
It happens in thailasamia treat here for this problem.

(vi) Treat here the deposits of amyloid protein & fat substance. If deposit,
treatSp 4 and if fat increase in the body treat Pn 4. In this case of pn4
obesityincreases due to fat increase in body

(viii) Treatment on this point increases the immunity of body.

M.P. Thymus glands

M.P. Thymus glands

MP blood

This point adjusts the blood flow and stops bleeding in any internal organ of the
body. A deficiency here indicates a microscopic or microscopic bleeding of the
same side.

MP blood
In the problem in chemistry of blood treat K7, Liv5, Sp6 and Pn6.
MP blood

Lymphocytes are produced in lymph nodes. For problems in lymphocytes in various parts of the body
& organs, treat lymph meridian & lymph drainage point in all the meridians.

C

ooo
A Treatise on 195
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 5 - English

