Carbohydrate Metabolism & Digestion

Carbohydrates taken in food is being broken by digestive enzymes in glucose and this
glucose gets mixed in blood through absorption in intestine all the cells take this glucose
from blood to generate energy for their own work. Excess quantity of glucose in blood gets
accumulated in the form of glycogen in liver and muscle. When person fasts then this
glycogen gets converted in glucose.

Functionality of carbohydrate metabolism is of following types:

(i)

(ii)
(ii
(iv)

)

(vi)

In the small intestine the pancreatic amylase converts all digestive
polysaccharides (starches) to disaccharide (sugars)

The pancreatic islet (islet of langerhans) secretes the hormones insulin &
glycogen that are involved in metabolic homeostasis, especially the blood glucose
level.

Liver converts the glucose in the presence of insulir.

Liver also converts this glucogen to glucose in presence of glucogen, as & when
needed these changes are important regulators of blood glucose level.

After eating food the quantity of glucose increases immensely in portal vein insulin
coverts this glucose to glucogen, glucogen converts again this glucogen to
glucose when the need arises this way blood glucose level is maintained

Erythrocytes & neurons can only use glucose for fuel.

(vii) Complete oxidation of glucose requires an adequate supply of oxygen
(viii) Oxidized glucose provides energy for metabolism activity which takes place in

(x)

®)

(xi)

liver.

Some of the glucose remain in the blood to maintain normal blood glucose level
of about 45 to 95 mg/ 100 ml. glucose in excess of above requirements is
converted in to glycogen by the liver. Insulin is the hormone necessary for the
change to take place pancreas produce insulin.

Adrenaline thyroxin & glucogen are the main hormones which convert glucogen
to glucose.

Diabetes is a disease characterized by excessive flow of urine called polyuria. it
is of two types:

202

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 5 - English )

