points located on meridian have centralization of energy. This principle is proved by
Dr. R. Voll by an electronic instrument 'Dermatron’.

Different organs give self produced energy to their own meridian so that they
can flow that energy towards hands and feet. In these meridians through Acupuncture point's
energy gets stored is a biological optimum level by the body.

If energy increases or decreases in any meridian or energy reduce or increases more
than required in any acupuncture meridian results in disease in the body. Treatment of
these disease can be given by the electric current on those acupuncture points.

Dr. R Voll proved through his researches that acupuncture points take electric current
only till that time once there normal energy reaches potential level. Once energy reaches
normal energy potential level Acupuncture points stop taking more energy on their own. It
means that treatment with electro acupuncture balance energy. When there is deficiency of
energy in any organ then treatment by electro acupuncture balance the energy.

In electro acupuncture 8 to 10 ml. ampere current is given which does not stimulate
our cerebrospinal nervous system. It means that current given in electro acupuncture is
only received by related point and cerebrospinal, nervous system remains unaffected. In
the case of deficiency of energy in related point electriccal current gives energy to that point
and the moment normal energy potential level reaches on that point, the point stops taking
energy. If the related point is already have excessive energy then that point does not take
any electric current. This whole process is observed and recorded by reading an indicator.
This can give information about related organ's following phases through each point.

1. Inflammatory phase

2. Degenerative phase

3. Pathological burdening of the organ or the body
4. Normatonic Situation

Before giving the treatment of electro acupuncture following points should be taken
into consideration.

1. There should not be any high voltage electronic instrument at the place of treatment.

2. Patient should be seated on wooden or plastic chair rather than iron chairs.
uiais

