if vision impairment happens due to yellow sopt in macula ,then it is the resultant of low
absorption of oxygen in lungs. The person inherits the right lung from father and left lung
from mother. If father is a smoker, the Son can have problem in the Macula of the right eye.
Father can be a reason of the tuberculosis (T.B.) of the right lung. At the time of treatment
therapists should consider the history of the diseases of the father also In the same way the
treatment protocols for the different parts of the eye are discussed in the book further.

9. On the Twelve Chinese Meridians and eight new tissue meridians following extra
and special points are discovered on which treatment could effectively cure the
malfunction of internal organs. We believe that the discoveries of Dr. Voll would
become a mile-stone in the acupuncture treatment.

© C.M.P. (Control Measurement point): This point gives the information about the
pathological disturbance in the internal part of the organ as the organ at large itself.

O R.P. (Reference Point): This point gives the information about the functional
disturbance of that organ.

C S.M.P. (Summation Measurement Point):This point helps in the diagnosis of
functional disturbances and ailments of the tissue system.

0 _PS.M.P. (Partial Summation Measurement Point): This point covers the tissue system
of the neighboring organs with similar functions.

© M.P. (Measurement Point) There can be various measurement points related to
one disease. Each of this point in called measurement point. It is an observation
that sometimes treatment on the control Measurement of that disease Cures the
malfunction amazingly and balances the functioning of that organ too

© There are six reference points (R.P.) on Lymph vessel. Meridian these reference
points tell about functional disturbance of six different organs. They are as following:
e — Lyt-1 (R.P.) Lymph Drainage of Ear
e Ly 2(R.P.) Lymph Drainage of Teeth & Jaw
e Ly 2a (R.P.) Lymph Drainage Of Eyes
e Ly 3(R.P.) Lymph Drainage of Nose & Paranasal Sinuses
e Ly 4a (R.P.) Lymph Drainage of Oesophagus
e —Ly4b (R.P.) Lymph Drainage of Larynx & Pharynx)

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 5 - English

