Treatment
Protocol

Special Remark

ND4,3a,1bt, GB9 Eye1,Ly2ad

ND 4,3a,1bt, UBS Eye2,Ly2ad

(i) Due to parses doube vision (Diplopia) happens
(ii) To escape from double vision patient keeps his neck
at one side which resuts in stiffness in neck.

(iii) When trochlear pareses is by birth then the neck
gets stiff in the second year of child.

(iv) Due to problem in trochlear nerve comea shifts upwards

(i) Reason For the stiffness in neck can be diplopia due
to paralysis of abducens nerve.

(ii) Inability in moving pupil form middle to outer sides
can be due to disturbance in abducens nerve.

(iii) For squint eyes, treat abducens nerve.

ND 4.3a, tat, Eye 3. Ly 2a, GB9J

I) In the partial paralysis of oculomotor nerve the upper eyelid drops
[doun.Eyes go towards outer side outside in the bottom.

(ii) In the complete paralysis of oculomotor nerve the upper eyelid
drops down and patient can not it i up. (ii) Pupil of eye becomes big
fand stagnant. It impairs the vision for various distances. (iv) Crossed
Jdeplopia in which night eye can see things of let side and left eye can
[see things of right side. It ayeball is moving towards down inside,
towards upside then treat oculomotor.

Ly 2a, Eye 4, Ly 1-2, Tw 21
Tw 21. PSMP . Anterior Portion of Eye
¥ all points

Ly 2a, Eye 4a, 14, UB 1, 67
UB 66b, UB10a, TW21
all points

(i) In the problems of sclera also treat tonsils.

(i) Treat urinary bladder also in case of disease of tear
glands,
(ii) It gets its sympathetic nerve supply from superior
cervical.
ganglion & parasympathetic nerve supply from the facial

Ly 2a, Eye 4, 5, 6 Si 1b (L&R)
C.MP. Small Intestine, St-8

(SMP odonton 5-8 Lower) Ly 2

(RP Teeth) GB1 (PSMP Posterior portion
of eye TW1b CMP Endocrine System)

+ all points

:

(i) Treat endocrine system & small intestines for

wisdom tooth & proolems of retina.

(ii) After the operation of maxillary sinus retina can
experience problem. In this case treat maxillary sinus
also.

54 A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 5 - English

