Ly 2a, Eye 6, H Bc (L & R) CMP Heart, Ci 8d (CMP
Circulation)

Ly2 (RP Teeth) GB1 (PSMP Posterior portion of eye)
all points

Treatment Special Remark
Protocol

Treat heart & circulation & wisdom tooth for problem of
choroid.

Ly 2a, Eye 7, Si 8 (SMP for Lower odonton 5 to 8)
Gv25 (SMP upper odonton 1 to 4)

St7 (SMP upper odonton 5 to 8) Ly 2R P Teeth, Lu 10¢
(CMP Lungs)

GB 1 (PSMP Postenar Eye)
‘Tw 16a Deep Cervical Lymph Node.
all points

Treat lungs & odonton 7 ‘or problems of choroid. Macular
in the point for maximum and best vision. Here blood
does not reach. It is dependent on the supply of oxygen.
So in the malfunction of macular treat lungs. Right lung is
inherited from father and left lung from mother. It father is
a smoker then there can be matfunction in macula of right
eye of son. T.B. of right lung can be hereditary. It is also
called acquired nicotine or acquired T.B. Smoker can
have malfunction of macula.

Ly2a, Eye 8, Ly2 (RP Teeth)

St 8 (SMP Lower adonton 5 to 8)
Li 1b (CMP Large Intestine)

Tw 21 (P-SMP Anterior Eye)

Tw 16a Deep Cervical Lymph Node.
all points

Uyfa, Eye 8, Spta (CMP spleen)
Pnta(CMP Pancreas)

Eye 3 oculomotor nerve

Cv24 SMP Odonton Lower 1 104
Ly2 RP Teeth & odonton 9 Lower
121 PSMP Anterior Eye

GB1a Ciliary Ganglion

Gv22 1-2 CMP organ degeneration
Lat points

Ly2a, Eye 10. Ly16a

9F3 oculomotor nerve

Cv 24 SMP Lower odonton 1 to 4
GB43b CMP Gall Bladder

Tw21 PSMP Anterior Eye

lyiéa

Yall points

Eye can see moths in its front it cellular deposits are
there in vitreous body. Nose becomes red an both the
sides. Main function of vitreous body is to maintain
roundness of eye vitreous body maintains shape and
intra-occular pressure of the eyeball to support the retina
against the choroid & prevent the eyeball from collapsing.
Retina detachment is the cause of liquefaction of vitreous
body & the retina floats in vitreous body.

{) Ciliary body can get affected first in diabetic people.
(ii) In the paralysis of ciliary mussels pupil stagnates in
between treat Gv 23 1-a CMP organ degeneration of
entire body. (iii) Ciliary body gets affected first in case of
for eightedness treat spleen & pancreas for this lens
get affected in case of near sightedness then treat
stomach. (iv) Ciliary bocy can experience irritation in
prostrate inlargment and hodkins disease. (It is type of
cancer in which while cells increase immensely)

(i) Oculomotor nerve 3 MP eye3 supplier the intrinsic
muscles of eyws.

(ii) Colour of iris is dependent on pigment cell white
coloured people do not have pigment cells and blue
eyed people have few pigment cells.

A Treatise on

\ 6)

Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 5 - English

