point for treatment also.

Brain is a computerised power station. Spinal cord function like main transformer.

Plexus of every organ or the innervations point is like a local transformer. When the

transformer of the localized colony is weak, the voltage of electricity reduces in the

houses of the colony and light becomes dim. In this It we rectify the transformer of

the colony, it restores the voltage of electricity results in fully light In the same way,

each organ in our body is also connected with one or more than one plexuses, If

there is any problem in any plexus, the energy supply to the related organ reduces

and instruction from the brain also start missing. This all result in reduced working

capacity of the organ and the person becomes the patient of that organ's disease

e.g.-related plexuses to heart are as Follows:

e Cardiac Plexus

e Coronary Plexus

e Cardiac Ganglia

In the case of the heart disease treatment for the functionality of all the three plexuses
result in the inhancement of functionality and working capacity of heart. At the time of surgical
operation of these plexuses of body, anesthesia is given to numb the related organs to
these plexuses. There are 48 plexuses in total, in a human body which are described in the
book.

0 L.D.P. (Lymphatic Drainage Point):

According to EAV every meridian has a lymphatic drainage point. This point controls

the lymphatic recreation of the related organ. Dieseases related to lymphatic

recreation of that organ are diagnosed by this point. Every part and all organs of the

body have related lymphatic drainage point. This discovery helps in curing irritation,

swelling, Abcess, Pocks, pus, infection of any part or any organ of the body easily, by

giving treatment on lymphatic drainage point of that organ.

ABBREVIATIONS:
e =C.M.P. Control measurement Point
e RP. Reference Point
e =PS.M.P. Partial Summation measurement Point
e = S.M.P. Summation Measurement Point
e MP. Measurement Point
e =S.C.P. Serous Membrane Point ooo
e ALP. Autonomic Innervations Point
e LDP. Lymphatic Drainage Point

A Treatise on (7)
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 5 - English

