Principles of Electro Acupuncture

Q

The meaning of Excessive energy is ‘itis' like arthritis, spondylitis, glocytis ect.
0 Scarcity of complete energy means "Ose" or "Sis" like paralysis, Neurosis, Varicose,
Fibrosis, and Stasis etc

61 Who has taken birth goes towards death gradually.

© InChinese Acupuncture whenever a gold needle is inserted in any point of the body,
that increases the energy there because gold needle attracts energy.

© In Chinese Acupuncture whenever a silver is needle irserted in any point of the
body, energy disperses from their results in reduction of energy.

G1 In Chinese Acupuncture treatment of energy is given on the guess basic. In electro
acupuncture to measure the actual energy of every point and every organ, an
electronic instrument named Dermatros in used. In this system treatment is given
on the basic of original diagnosis rather than guess work. Treatment is also given by
electronic instrument. This saves the therapists from both the situation of giving
treatment more than required or less than required treatment.

© Inclassical Chinese Acupuncture the energy available in the patient's body is used
for the balancing of energy in the body whereas in electro-acupuncture the electric
energy can be given on the desired area or on the desired organ and energy can
also be increased in the desired quantity.

OG Premonition of Disease & Treatment : Body keeps producing hemotoxins and
regularly expels them out of the body. Whenever these homotoxins keep remain in
the body show in the form of disease when homotoxins in the body for the treatment
and diagnosis increase in tha body then the cells of the body start degenerating and
gives birth to serious disease. It is very important to know the phase of the homotoxins
purpose .but it is been observed that diagnosis through clinical tests show the
disease only in the last phase but by that time disease become severe and incurable.
"Every illness expresses the effect of homotoxins,that is of substances produced
by the body itself" - Dr. Reckweg

8 A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 5 - English

