In above stated nine meridian first eight meridians start from the fingers of hands - or
toe of feet but the ninth meridian (eye orbit meridians) is located around the orbit of the eye.

The importance and utility of all these nine meridians, their path and points located on
the meridians are further described in the book.

2. Kidney Meridian - According to T.C.M. this meridian starts from K-1 on the sole of
the foot. According to E.A.V. Kidney meridian starts from tibeal side of the nail of the
smallest toe (Vth toe) of the foot, from here it goes (through chinese K-1 to the sole
of the foot. In E.A.V. the points on this meridian are also different till ankle according
to E.A.V. Chinese point K-1 in is the deep lymph point of Kidney.

3. The points of Urinary Bladder Meridian on lumbar and back of thigh are also
different in EAV.

4. Triple Warmer Meridian is known as Endocrine Meridian in E.A.V. treatment for
the malfunctions of all endocrine glands can be treated through this Meridian.

5. Pericardium Meridian Is known as circulation meridian in EAV. All the points related
to the arteries and veins etc of the circulatory system in the body are plotted on this
meridian.

6. According to E.A.V. Spleen Meridian is only on the veft side, this meridian is used
for the treatment of the chemistry of blood. Important points related to the white
blood cells,Lymphocytes, etc. in blood are described on this meridian.

7. In E.A.V. the right side of spleen meridian is called Blood, Diabetes, Gout, Fat
metabolism, Albumin etc are treated on this meridian.

8. Eye Orbit Meridian is used for the treatment of various parts of eyes like retina
Macula, Cornea, Sclera, Choroid, Vitreous Body, Ciliary Body, Iris Taer Gland,
Conjunctiva etc All the three cranial motors nerves of eye(trochlear Nerve Oculomotor
nerves and abducens nerve) can be treated on this meridian.

Dr. R, Voll has prepared various treatment protocols for the various disease of eye by
electro acupuncture with the help of these treatment protocols, treatment of the irretrievable
diseases of eye is also possible.

According to Dr. Voll diseases in any part of eye shows the malfunction in the organ of
the body therefore while treating eye one must treat the related internal organ also for example
