Focus of disturbance in E.A.V

Focus of disturbance is called foci there is a proverb in china - "disease here and the
toot of the disease in there and treat the root to cure the disease effectively" Disease is
focus of disturbance and reason root of disease is called focus of treatment. Earlier in the
treatment of Allopathic System teeth were removed in rheumatoid Arthritis This sometimes
cured rheumatoid arthritis amazingly. But in few cases there was no relief even after the
removal of teeth. In this case rheumatoid arthritis was understood as focus of Disturbance
and teeth as the root of disease or focus of treatment.

In E.A.V. Dr. Voll has changed this concept and proved by his research that disease of
internal organs of body reflects in irritation, inflammation pain etc. of teeth, sinus, tonsils,
etc. due to this irritation, inflammation or pain functionality of internal organs of body disturb.
Tonsil, tooth, sinus etc are known as focus of disturbance is established with internal organ,
spinal column , Body joints, endocrine glands etc. of the body. The root cause of disease is
in internal organs, spinal column, Body joints, endocrine glands of body and treatment of
these cures the problems of focus of disturbance of teeth, sinus, tonsil etc. amazingly
sometimes treatment of teeth sinus, tonsil etc. cure the disease of internal organs
surprisingly.

In E.A.V. Following focus of disturbances are explained :

(i) Dental Foci

(ii) Foci in tonsils

(iii) Foci in nasal & paranasal sinuses

(iv) Scars

(v) _ Diverticuli in the small intestine and duodenum includixg meckel's diverticulum.

(vi) Diverticuli in the large intestine

(vii) Bronchial diverticuli

(viii) Diverticuli in Esophagus or stomach

(ix) Apendictis as focus disturbance

(x) Biliary fields of disturbance

(xi) Genito urinary field of disturbance

Most impotant focus of disturbance are in teeth. In toothless people also foci are there

A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 5 - English

