movement of the lower jaw fails. Corneal reflex, disappears.

Neurological pain of trigeminal nerve is known as trigeminal neurolegia. Distribution area of
V" carnial nerve becomes very painful which Increases even on touching movement of jaw
also becomes painful.

5. Cranial Nerve No VII : (Facial Nerve)

It controls all the muscles of face (except upper eyelid) this nerve takes taste sensations
from anterior of 2/3rd tongue.

Facial nerve paralysis is called bell's palsey In this wrinkles of face disappears lower
eyelid drops down and angle of the face gets askewed saliva starts droolimg from the
corner of mouth on its own. In this case patient cannot close his eyes.

6. Cranial Nerve 8th : (Vstibulo-Cochlear Nerve)

Cochlear nerves are related to hearing organs and vestibular nerve is related with the
dynamic & static equilibrium of body through semicircular canals of ears. It maintains balance
and posture of our body.

Damage of cochlear nerve results in deafness. Damage of vestibular nerve disbalances
various positions of body.

Vertigo: Malfunction in vestibular system of ears results in vertigo. In this patient feels
dizzy. Vertigo stops in the lying down position.

Menier's Disease: Sudden increase in the amount of endolymph in he thru circular canals
of internal ear results in tingling. And patient cannot hear anything. He experience vertigo
also.

7. Cranial Nerve No IX : (Glossopharyngeal Nerve)

It receives the knowledge of taste from the posterior 2/3rd tongue and controls muscles
which are helpful in swalling of water and food.

In the paralysis of glassopharyngeal nerve patient loose the feeling of taste and cannot
swallow food and water.

8. Cranial Nerve No X : (Vagus Nerve)

Heart rate increased due to non-functionality of this nerve.|ungs dilates and food cannot
move forward in intestines.

9. Cranial Nerve No XI : (Spinal Accessory Nerve)
It controls sternomastoid muscles in neck and trapezivs muscles in shoulder which

156 A Treatise on
Advance Acupressure / Acupuncture - Part 5 - English

